The Bell 206 is a family of two-bladed, single- and twin-engined helicopters, manufactured by Bell Helicopter at its Mirabel, Quebec, plant. Originally developed as the Bell YOH-4 for the United States Army's Light Observation Helicopter program, it was not selected by the Army. Bell redesigned the airframe and successfully marketed the aircraft commercially as the five-place Bell 206A JetRanger. The new design was eventually selected by the Army as the OH-58 Kiowa.
Bell also developed a seven-place LongRanger, which was later offered with a twin-engined option as the TwinRanger, while Tridair Helicopters offers a similar conversion of the LongRanger called the Gemini ST. The ICAO-assigned model designation "B06" is used on flight plans for the JetRanger and LongRanger, and the designation "B06T" is used for the twin-engined TwinRangers.


## Development


### Origins and JetRanger

On October 14, 1960, the United States Navy solicited responses from 25 aircraft manufacturers to a request for proposals (RFP) on behalf of the Army for the Light Observation Helicopter (LOH). Bell entered the competition along with 12 other manufacturers, including Hiller Aircraft and Hughes Tool Co., Aircraft Division. Bell submitted the D-250 design, which would be designated as the YHO-4. On May 19, 1961, Bell and Hiller were announced as winners of the design competition.
Bell developed the D-250 design into the Bell 206 aircraft, redesignated as YOH-4A in 1962, and produced five prototype aircraft for the Army's test and evaluation phase. The first prototype flew on December 8, 1962. The YOH-4A also came to be known as "The Ugly Duckling" in comparison to the other contending aircraft. Following a fly-off of the Bell, Hughes and Fairchild-Hiller prototypes, the Hughes OH-6 was selected in May 1965.
When the YOH-4A was eliminated by the Army, Bell went about solving the problem of marketing the aircraft. In addition to the image problem, the helicopter lacked cargo space and only provided cramped seating for the planned three passengers. The solution was a redesigned fuselage, sleeker and aesthetically appealing, adding 16 cu ft (0.45 m3) of cargo space in the process. A Bell executive contributed to this redesign by drawing on a sketch two lines extending the fuselage to where it meets the tail. The redesign was designated Bell 206A, and Bell President Edwin J. Ducayet named it the JetRanger, denoting an evolution from the popular Model 47J Ranger.
Bell Helicopter ended production of the Bell 206B-3 version in 2010. In 2011, used 206B-3s sold for around $1.4 million depending upon the equipment and configuration.  Bell intends for the Bell 505 Jet Ranger X to replace the 206 five-seat versions from around 2015 and compete with the Robinson R66.


### LongRanger

The 206L LongRanger is a stretched variant with seating for seven. The fuselage, stretched a total of 30 inches (760 mm), adds two rear-facing seats between the front and rear seats. Since 1975, Bell has produced more than 1,700 LongRangers across all variant types. In 1981, a military version, the 206L TexasRanger was released. The original 206L used an Allison 250-C20B engine, and a series of model upgrades replaced this engine with more powerful versions; the 206L-1 used a 250-C28, and the 206L-3 and 206L-4 used the 250-C30P.
In both applications, the 250-C30P is derated from 650 hp for takeoff and 501 hp continuous. The 206L-3 is transmission-limited to 435 hp for take-off, and the 206L-4 is transmission-limited to 495 hp. The derating of the C30P produces an advantage in hot-day and high-altitude operations as it can produce the rated horsepower at higher altitudes and temperatures where applications that use the maximum rating of the engine at sea level suffer accelerated performance deterioration with increases in temperature and altitude. The 206L-3 and L-4 have not been offered in a twin configuration under those model designations.
In 2007, Bell announced an upgrade program for the 206L-1 and 206L-3 which is designed to modify the aircraft to the 206L-4 configuration; modified aircraft are designated 206L-1+ and 206L-3+. Modifications include strengthened airframe structural components (including a new tailboom), improved transmission, upgraded engine for the L-1, all of which result in a maximum gross weight increase of 300 pounds and increased performance.
Production of the 206L-4 ended in June 2017 with over 3,800 LongRangers built.


### Gemini ST and TwinRanger
The TwinRanger name dates from the mid-1980s when Bell developed the Bell 400 TwinRanger, but it never entered production.
In 1989, Tridair Helicopters began developing a twin-engine conversion of the LongRanger, the Gemini ST. The prototype's first flight was on January 16, 1991, while full FAA certification was awarded in November. Certification covers the conversion of LongRanger 206L-1s, L-3s and L-4s to Gemini ST configuration. In mid-1994 the Gemini ST was certificated as the first Single/Twin aircraft, allowing it to operate either as a single or twin engine aircraft throughout all phases of flight.
The Bell 206LT TwinRanger was a new-build production model equivalent to Tridair's Gemini ST, and was based on the 206L-4. Thirteen 206LTs were built, the first being delivered in January 1994, and the last in 1997. The TwinRanger was replaced in Bell's lineup by the mostly-new Bell 427.


## Operational history

The first Bell 206A flew on January 10, 1966, and the aircraft was revealed later that month at the Helicopter Association of America (HAA) convention. On October 20, 1966, the JetRanger received FAA certification. Delivery of the JetRanger to customers began on January 13, 1967, with the first aircraft being purchased by Harry Holly, CEO of the Hollymatic Corporation and previous owner of a Bell Ranger. In 1968, the United States Navy selected the 206A as its primary trainer, the TH-57 Sea Ranger. The Army also eventually selected the 206A for a light observation helicopter as the OH-58 Kiowa.
The basic shape and design of the JetRanger remained unchanged since 1967, but Bell introduced the 206B JetRanger II in 1971. In 1977, the 206B-3 JetRanger III was introduced with its modified tail rotor and more powerful engine. The JetRanger is popular with news media for traffic and news reporting. The LongRanger is commonly used as an air ambulance and as a corporate transport. On September 1, 1982, pilots H. Ross Perot, Jr. and Jay Coburn departed Dallas, Texas in the "Spirit of Texas", a Bell 206L-1 (N3911Z). They returned on 30 September, 29 days and 3 hours later, completing the first around-the-world helicopter flight.
The Bell 206B was first introduced to the Canadian market shortly after its certification in 1967. Its early adoption was driven by the booming resource industries of the time, particularly in oil and gas exploration, mining, and forestry. Its light weight, combined with the ability to land in rugged, remote locations, made it an ideal tool for transporting geologists, surveyors, and equipment to otherwise inaccessible areas of Canada's vast wilderness.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the JetRanger became a critical part of exploration in northern Canada, including the Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Arctic regions, where harsh weather conditions and rough terrain demanded a helicopter that could perform in all environments. The Bell 206B's durability and low operating cost also made it a favorite for these long, sometimes dangerous missions.
In 1983, Australian businessman Dick Smith became the first helicopter pilot to complete a solo trip around the world in 260 flight hours. During the trip, he landed his 206B-3 (S/N 3653; VH-DIK) on prepositioned container ships to refuel between Japan and the Aleutian Islands.
In 1993, the U.S. Army chose the Bell 206B-3 as the winner of the New Training Helicopter competition, to serve as its primary training helicopter, the TH-67 Creek. The number of TH-67s being divested by the Army is too small to impact civilian markets.
On July 22, 1994, Ron Bower landed his 206B-3 (N206AJ) at Hurst, Texas, setting a new record for around-the-world flight by a helicopter. Bower had departed on June 24 and returned 24 days, 4 hours, 36 minutes and 24 seconds later, averaging 35.62 knots (40.99 mph; 65.97 km/h). Bower had added a 91-US-gallon (340 L) auxiliary fuel tank, which doubled the JetRanger III's range.


## Variants


### Civilian

Bell 206
Five YOH-4A prototypes, for flight evaluation in the Army's LOH program (1963).
Bell 206A
Initial production version, powered by an Allison 250-C18 turboshaft engine. FAA-certified in 1966. Selected as the OH-58A Kiowa in 1968.
Agusta-Bell 206A
License-built in Italy.
Bell 206A-1
OH-58A aircraft that are modified for FAA civil certification.
Agusta-Bell 206A-1
License-built in Italy.
Bell 206B
Upgraded Allison 250-C20 engine.
Agusta-Bell 206B
License-built in Italy.
Bell 206B-2
Bell 206B models upgraded with Bell 206B-3 improvements.

Bell 206B-3
Upgraded Allison 250-C20J engine and added 2 inches (51 mm) to tail rotor diameter for yaw control.
Bell 206L LongRanger
Stretched, seven-seat configuration, powered by an Allison 250-C20B turboshaft engine.
Bell 206L-1 LongRanger II
Higher-powered version, powered by an Allison 250-C28 turboshaft engine.
Bell 206L-1+ LongRanger
Bell modifications, including 250-C30P engine, to upgrade aircraft to 206L-4 configuration.
Bell 206L-3 LongRanger III
Powered by an Allison 250-C30P turboshaft engine.
Bell 206L-3+ LongRanger
Bell modifications to upgrade aircraft to 206L-4 configuration.
Bell 206L-4 LongRanger IV
Improved version, 250-C30P engine and transmission upgrade.
Bell 206LT TwinRanger
Twin-engined conversions and new-builds of the 206L; replaced by the Bell 427.

Bell 407
based on the 206L with four-blade rotor system.
Bell 417
upgraded 407 with larger engine; project canceled.
Cardoen Cb 206L-III
Chilean modified LongRanger III with narrow forward fuselage and flat-plate cockpit windows. At least two converted, with first flight in 1989.
HESA Shahed 278
An Iranian re-hash of Bell 206 components.
Aurora Flight Sciences Tactical Autonomous Aerial Logistics System test platform


### Military
Bell 206AS
Export version for the Chilean Navy.

Bell CH-139 JetRanger
Canadian military designation for the Bell 206B-3.
Hkp 6A
Swedish Army designation for the Agusta-Bell 206A. 21 units manufactured in Italy, used as training, liaison, light transport, scout and anti-tank helicopters armed with ATGMs.
Hkp 6B
Swedish Navy designation for the Agusta-Bell 206A. 10 units manufactured in Italy, used as anti-submarine helicopters, armed with depth charges. This variant was equipped with emergency inflatable floats.
OH-58 Kiowa
Light observation helicopter that replaced the OH-6A Cayuse.
TH-57A Sea Ranger
40 commercial Bell 206A aircraft purchased as the primary U.S. Navy helicopter trainer in January 1968 for training prospective U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine Corps, U.S. Coast Guard and select NATO/Allied helicopter pilots.

206L TexasRanger
proposed export military version. One demonstrator was built (1981).
TH-57B
45 commercial Bell 206B-3 helicopters purchased by the US Navy in 1989 as replacements for the TH-57A for primary training under visual flight rules.
TH-57C Sea Ranger
71 commercial Bell 206B-3 helicopters purchased by the US Navy beginning prior to 1985 with cockpits configured for advanced training under instrument flight rules.
TH-57D
Planned upgrade program to convert US Navy TH-57B and TH-57C aircraft to a single standard digital cockpit. This program never materialized in operational aircraft.
TH-67 Creek
137 commercial Bell 206B-3s purchased in 1993 as the primary and instrument helicopter trainer for the US Army at Fort Novosel, Alabama. 35 in VFR configuration and 102 in IFR configuration. The US Army currently has 181 units, of which 121 are in VFR configuration and 60 are in IFR configuration. All TH-67s display US registrations ("N" numbers) and are operated as public use aircraft.
OH-4
Brazilian Air Force designation for an observation variant of the Model 206B-3. Originally designated LH-4.
VH-4
Brazilian Air Force designation for a VIP transport variant of the Model 206B-3.
HU-6
Brazilian Navy designation for a utility variant of the Model 206B-3.
IH-6/IH-6A/IH-6B
Brazilian Navy designations for trainer variants of the Model 206B-3. The IH-6 and IH-6A were originally designated HI-6 and HI-6A, respectively.
H.8
(Thai: ฮ.๘) Royal Thai Armed Forces designation for the Model 206B-3.
H.PhT.1
(Thai: ฮ.ผฑ.๑) Royal Thai Armed Forces designation for the Model 206B-2 used for aerial survey.


## Operators

The Bell 206 has been popular for all types of uses both commercial and private.


### Military and government

 Albania
Albanian Air Force
 Argentina
Argentine Army Aviation
 Bangladesh
Bangladesh Air Force
Bangladesh Army
 Brazil
Brazilian Air Force
Brazilian Navy

 Bulgaria
Bulgarian Air Force
 Brunei
Royal Brunei Air Force
 Cameroon
Cameroon Air Force

 Chile
Chilean Air Force
Chilean Navy
 Colombia
Colombian Aerospace Force
National Police of Colombia
 Democratic Republic of the Congo
Air Force of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
 Croatia
Croatian Air Force
Croatian Police
 Cyprus

Cyprus Air Command
 Dominican Republic
Dominican Republic Air Force
 Ecuador
Ecuadorian Air Force
Ecuadorian Navy
 Finland
Finnish Border Guard
 Greece
Greek Army
 Guatemala
Guatemalan Air Force
 Guyana
Guyana Defence Force
 Iran

Islamic Republic of Iran Air Force
Islamic Republic of Iran Army
 Iraq
Iraqi Air Force
 Israel
Israeli Air Force
 Italy
Italian Army
Polizia di Stato
Vigili del Fuoco
 Jamaica
Jamaica Defence Force
 Japan
Japan Coast Guard
 Latvia
Latvian State Border Guard
 Lesotho
Lesotho Defence Force
 North Macedonia
North Macedonia Air Brigade
 Mexico
Mexican Air Force
 Morocco
Royal Moroccan Air Force
 Oman
Royal Air Force of Oman
 Pakistan
Pakistan Army
 Peru
Peruvian Navy
 Poland
Polish Police

 Slovenia
Slovenian Air Force and Air Defence
Slovenian national police force
 Sri Lanka
Sri Lanka Air Force
 Republic of China (Taiwan)
Republic of China Army
 Thailand
Royal Thai Army
Royal Thai Police
 Turkey
Turkish Army

 Uganda
Ugandan Air Force

 United States
Chicago Police Department
San Juan County Sheriff Dept.

Los Angeles Police Department
Memphis Police Department
Omaha Police Department
King County Sheriff's Office
New Jersey State Trooper
Missouri State Highway Patrol
United States Army
United States Navy
United States Department of the Interior
 Venezuela
Venezuelan Army
Venezuelan Navy
 Yemen
Yemeni Air Force
 Zambia
Zambian Air Force


### Former operators

 Australia
Australian Army
Royal Australian Navy
 Canada
Canadian Forces
Canadian Coast Guard
 Chile
Chilean Army
 Indonesia
Indonesian Army Aviation Center
Indonesian National Police – Retired in 2007
 Jamaica
Jamaica Defence Force
 Macedonia
Macedonia Air Brigade
 Malta
Armed Forces of Malta
 Pahlavi Iran
Imperial Iranian Air Force
 Serbia
Serbian Police
 Sweden
Swedish Air Force
Swedish Navy


## Notable accidents and incidents
On August 1, 1977, famous U-2 spy plane pilot Francis Gary Powers was piloting a helicopter for KNBC Channel 4 over West Los Angeles, California, when the aircraft crashed, killing him and cameraman George Spears. They were video recording brush fires in Santa Barbara County in the station's helicopter and were leaving the area.
On August 27, 1990, musician Stevie Ray Vaughan, pilot Jeff Brown, and three members of Eric Clapton's crew, Bobby Brooks, Nigel Browne, and Colin Smythe, were killed in a Bell 206B crash.
On October 25, 1991, a Bell 206 carrying rock music concert promoter Bill Graham, his girlfriend Melissa Gold, and pilot Steve Kahn crashed into a transmission tower west of Vallejo, California, killing everyone on board. The cause of the accident was determined to be the pilot's intentional flight into known adverse weather conditions.
On January 12, 1994, an Agusta-Bell 206A-1 crashed while attempting to land at the helipad of the Central Command headquarters in Neve Yaakov, killing all four occupants on board, including IDF Major General Nehemiah Tamari.
On July 10, 2002, a Bell 206 LIII of the Cyprus national guard, carrying two pilots and five passengers, including the chief of the National Guard, Lt. Gen. Evangelos Florakis, crashed after on air fire, near Kouklia village, Pafos, close to Andreas Papandreou air base, killing all on board.
On March 9, 2009, Bangladesh Army aviation unit Bell 206L flown by pilot Lt Col MD Shahidul Islam and co-pilot Major Saif crashed at Rouha in Kalihati sub-district. The helicopter was carrying General Officer Commanding of 55 Infantry Division and Jessore Area Commander Maj Gen Rafiqul Islam. Maj Gen Islam and pilot Lt Col Islam died in the crash while co-pilot Major Saif sustained serious injuries.
On August 15, 2010, a Bell 206B of the Missouri State Highway Patrol crashed after it ran out of fuel, killing pilot Sergeant Joseph George Schuengel.
On August 20, 2014, Guatemala's Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces Rudy Ortiz was killed when his Bell 206 crashed.
On February 11, 2019, Brazilian journalist Ricardo Boechat and the pilot were killed when Bell 206B, PT-HPG, crashed into a truck while attempting an emergency landing on a highway.
On April 10, 2025, a sightseeing Bell 206 LongRanger IV (L-4) crashed into the Hudson River off Newport, Jersey City, killing all six occupants. Witnesses described the helicopter as coming apart in mid-air, with the rotor still spinning, detached from the body. There was criticism that, while vehicles used as licensed taxis must be replaced after five to eight years, there are no such rules for helicopters that may be 30 or 40 years old; the 2025 crash was of a 21-year-old aircraft. There were recommendations that all New York helicopter use should be restricted to services that needed them—police, military, government, news—rather than tourism.


## Specifications (206B Jetranger II)

Data from Jane's All The World's Aircraft, 1976-1977General characteristics
Crew: 1
Capacity: 4 passengers
Length: 38 ft 9.5 in (11.824 m) including rotors
Fuselage length: 31 ft 2 in (9.50 m)
Height: 9 ft 6.5 in (2.908 m) 
Interior dimensions: 7 ft 2 in (2.18 m) length, by 4 ft 2 in (1.27 m) width, by 4 ft 3 in (1.30 m) height, plus 16 cu ft (453 L) baggage compartment
Empty weight: 1,455 lb (660 kg)
Max takeoff weight: 3,200 lb (1,451 kg)
Powerplant: 1 × Allison 250-C20 turboshaft engine, 400 hp (298 kW)
Main rotor diameter:  33 ft 4 in (10.16 m)
Main rotor area: 873 sq ft (81.1 m2) 
Blade section: – NACA 0012 mod (11.3%)
Performance

Maximum speed: 122 kn (140 mph, 226 km/h) at MTOW (sea level)
Maximum speed at 5,000 ft: 116 kn (133 mph; 215 km/h) at MTOW
Cruise speed: 120 kn (140 mph, 220 km/h) at MTOW, 5,000 feet
Range: 337 nmi (388 mi, 624 km) at MTOW, 5,000 feet, cruise speed, no reserves
Service ceiling: 20,000 ft (6,100 m) at MTOW
Rate of climb: 1,350 ft/min (6.9 m/s)
Disk loading: 4 lb/sq ft (20 kg/m2)
Power/mass: 0.09 hp/lb (0.15 kW/kg)


## Notable appearances in media

Two Bell 206 helicopters were used in the 1980s British TV show Treasure Hunt, one to carry the presenter/crew and one for communications relay. The presenter/crew helicopter featured prominently throughout the show. Several years after the show this helicopter was on an unrelated flight when it ditched and sank with no fatalities.


## See also

Related development

Bell 505 Jet Ranger X
Bell 407
Bell OH-58 Kiowa
HESA Shahed 278
HESA Shahed 285
Aircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era

Eurocopter AS350 Écureuil
Eurocopter EC120 Colibri
Eurocopter EC130
Hiller FH1100
MD Helicopters MD 500
PZL SW-4 Puszczyk
Robinson R66

Related lists

List of military aircraft of the United States
List of most-produced rotorcraft


## References


### Citations


## Bibliography
Elliot, Bryn (March–April 1997). "Bears in the Air: The US Air Police Perspective". Air Enthusiast. No. 68. pp. 46–51. ISSN 0143-5450.
Elliott, Bryn (May–June 1999). "On the Beat: The First 60 Years of Britain's Air Police, Part Two". Air Enthusiast (81): 64–69. ISSN 0143-5450.
Hoyle, Craig (December 10–16, 2013). "World Air Forces Directory". Flight International. 184 (5419): 24–51. ISSN 0015-3710.
Hoyle, Craig (December 9–15, 2014). "World Air Forces Directory". Flight International. 186 (5468): 24–55. ISSN 0015-3710.
Lambert, Mark, ed. (1991). Jane's All The World's Aircraft 1991–92. Coulsdon, UK: Jane's Defence Data. ISBN 0-7106-0965-5.


## External links

Bell Model 206L-4 page on Bell's site