The Cessna 172 Skyhawk is an American four-seat, single-engine, high wing, fixed-wing aircraft made by the Cessna Aircraft Company. First flown in 1955, more 172s have been built than any other aircraft. It was developed from the 1948 Cessna 170 but with tricycle landing gear rather than conventional landing gear. The Skyhawk name was originally used for a trim package, but was later applied to all standard-production 172 aircraft, while some upgraded versions were marketed as the Cutlass, Powermatic, and Hawk XP. The aircraft was also produced under license in France by Reims Aviation, which marketed upgraded versions as the Reims Rocket.
Measured by its longevity and popularity, the Cessna 172 is the most successful aircraft in history. Cessna delivered the first production model in 1956, and as of 2015, the company and its partners had built more than 44,000 units. With a break from 1986 to 1996, the aircraft remains in production today.
A light general aviation airplane, the Skyhawk's main competitors throughout much of its history were the Beechcraft Musketeer and Grumman American AA-5 series, though neither are currently in production. Other prominent competitors still in production include the Piper PA-28 Cherokee, and, more recently, the Diamond DA40 Diamond Star and Cirrus SR20.


## Design and development
The Cessna 172 started as a tricycle landing gear variant of the taildragger Cessna 170, with a basic level of standard equipment. In January 1955, Cessna flew an improved variant of the Cessna 170, a Continental O-300-A-powered Cessna 170C with larger elevators and a more angular tailfin. Although the variant was tested and certified, Cessna decided to modify it with a tricycle landing gear, and the modified Cessna 170C flew again on June 12, 1955. To reduce the time and cost of certification, the type was added to the Cessna 170 type certificate as the Model 172. Later, the 172 was given its own type certificate. The 172 became an overnight sales success, and over 1,400 were built in 1956, its first full year of production.
Early 172s were similar in appearance to the 170s, with the same straight aft fuselage and tall landing gear legs, although the 172 had a straight tailfin while the 170 had a rounded fin and rudder. In 1960, the 172A incorporated revised landing gear and the swept-back tailfin, which is still in use today.
The final aesthetic development, found in the 1963 172D and all later 172 models, was a lowered rear deck allowing an aft window. Cessna advertised this added rear visibility as "Omni-Vision".
Production halted in 1986 because of Product liability costs, but resumed in 1996 at Cessna's new factory at Independence, Kansas with the Cessna 172R Skyhawk. Cessna supplemented this in 1998 with the 180 hp (134 kW) Cessna 172S Skyhawk SP.


### Modifications
The Cessna 172 may be modified via a wide array of supplemental type certificates (STCs), including increased engine power and higher gross weights. Available STC engine modifications increase power from 180 to 210 hp (134 to 157 kW), add constant-speed propellers, or allow the use of automobile gasoline. Other modifications include additional fuel tank capacity in the wing tips, added baggage compartment tanks, added wheel pants to reduce drag, or enhanced landing and takeoff performance and safety with a STOL kit. The 172 has also been equipped with the 180 hp (134 kW) fuel injected Superior Air Parts Vantage engine.


## Operational history


### World records
From December 4, 1958, to February 7, 1959, Robert Timm and John Cook set the world record for (refueled) flight endurance in a used Cessna 172, registration number N9172B. They took off from McCarran Field (now Harry Reid International Airport) in Las Vegas, Nevada, and landed back at McCarran Field after 64 days, 22 hours, 19 minutes and 5 seconds in a flight covering an estimated 150,000 miles (240,000 km), over 6 times further than flying around the world at the equator. The flight was part of a fund-raising effort for the Damon Runyon Cancer Fund. The aircraft is now on display at the airport.


## Variants

Cessna has historically used model years similar to U.S. auto manufacturers, with sales of new models typically starting a few months prior to the actual calendar year.

172
Introduced in November 1955 for the 1956 model year as a development of the Cessna 170B with tricycle landing gear, dubbed "Land-O-Matic" by Cessna.  The 172 also featured a redesigned tail similar to the experimental 170C, "Para-Lift" flaps, and a maximum gross weight of 2,200 lb (998 kg) while retaining the 170B's 145 hp (108 kW) Continental O-300-A six-cylinder, air-cooled engine.  The 1957 and 1959 model years brought only minor changes, while 1959 introduced a new cowling for improved engine cooling.  The prototype 172, c/n 612, was modified from 170 c/n 27053, which previously served as the prototype of the 170B.  A total of 3,757 were constructed over the four model years; 1,178 (1956), 1,041 (1957), 750 (1958), 788 (1959).

172A

1960 model year with a swept-back vertical tail and rudder and powered by a 145 hp (108 kW) O-300-C engine.  It was also the first 172 to be certified for floatplane operation.  994 built.

172B
1961 model year with shorter landing gear, engine mounts lengthened by three inches (76 mm), a reshaped cowling, a pointed propeller spinner, and an increased gross weight of 2,250 lb (1,021 kg). The stepped firewall introduced in the closely related Cessna 175 was adopted in the 172, along with the 175's wider, rearranged instrument panel located further aft in the fuselage. For the first time, the Skyhawk name was applied to an available deluxe option package that included optional wheel fairings, avionics, and a cargo door along with full exterior paint rather than partial paint stripes. The Skyhawk was also powered by an O-300-D in place of the O-300-C of the standard model. 989 built.

172C
1962 model year with fiberglass wingtips, redesigned wheel fairings, a key starter to replace the previous pull-starter, and an optional autopilot. The seats were redesigned to be six-way adjustable, and a child seat was made optional to allow two children to be carried in the baggage area.  810 built.

172D

1963 model year with a cut down rear fuselage with a wraparound Omni-Vision rear window, a one-piece windshield, increased horizontal stabilizer span, and a folding hat shelf in the rear cabin.  Gross weight was increased to 2,300 lb (1,043 kg), where it would stay until the 172P.  New rudder and brake pedals were also added. 1,011 were built by Cessna, while a further 18 were produced by Reims Aviation in France as the F172D.

172E
1964 model year with a redesigned instrument panel with center-mounted avionics and circuit breakers replacing the electrical fuses of previous models. 1,209 built, 67 built by Reims as the F172E.

172F
1965 model year with electrically operated flaps to replace the previous lever-operated system and improved instrument lighting.  1,400 built, plus 94 by Reims as the F172F.
The 172F formed the basis for the U.S. Air Force's T-41A Mescalero primary trainer, which was used during the 1960s and early 1970s as initial flight screening aircraft in USAF Undergraduate Pilot Training (UPT).  Following their removal from the UPT program, some extant USAF T-41s were assigned to the U.S. Air Force Academy for the cadet pilot indoctrination program, while others were distributed to Air Force aero clubs.

172G

1966 model year with a longer, more pointed spinner and sold for US$12,450 in its basic 172 version and US$13,300 in the upgraded Skyhawk version. 1,474 built (including 26 as the T-41A), plus 140 by Reims as the F172G.

172H
1967 model year with a 60A alternator replacing the generator, a rotating beacon replacing the flashing unit, redesigned wheel fairings, and a shorter-stroke nose gear oleo to reduce drag and improve the appearance of the aircraft in flight. A new cowling was used, introducing shock-mounts that transmitted lower noise levels to the cockpit and reduced cowl cracking. The electric stall warning horn was replaced by a pneumatic one.  1,586 built (including 34 as the T-41A), plus 435 by Reims as the F172H for both the 1967 and 1968 model years.

172I

The 1968 model year marked the beginning of the Lycoming-powered 172s, with the 172I introduced with a Lycoming O-320-E2D engine of 150 hp (112 kW), an increase of 5 hp (3.7 kW) over the Continental powerplant.  The increased power resulted in an increase in optimal cruise from 130 mph (209 km/h) true airspeed (TAS) to 131 mph (211 km/h) TAS.  There was no change in the sea level rate of climb at 645 ft (197 m) per minute.  Starting with this model, the standard and deluxe Skyhawk models were no longer powered by different engines.  The 172I also introduced the first standard "T" instrument arrangement.  649 built.

172J

For 1968, Cessna planned to replace the 172 with a newly designed aircraft called the 172J, featuring the same general configuration but with a more sloping windshield, a strutless cantilever wing, a more stylish interior, and various other improvements. A single 172J prototype, registered N3765C (c/n 660), was built.  However, the popularity of the previous 172 with Cessna dealers and flight schools prompted the cancellation of the replacement plan, and the 172J was redesignated as the 177 from the second prototype onward and sold alongside the 172.

172K

Introduced for the 1969 model year with a redesigned tailfin cap and reshaped rear windows enlarged by 16 square inches (103 cm2). Optional long-range 52 US gal (197 L) wing fuel tanks were also offered.  The 1970 model year featured fiberglass, downward-shaped, conical camber wingtips and optional fully articulated seats.  2,055 built for both model years, plus 50 by Reims as the F172K.

172L
Introduced for the 1971 model year with tapered, tubular steel landing gear legs replacing the original flat spring steel legs, increasing landing gear width by 12 in (30 cm).  The new landing gear was lighter, but required aerodynamic fairings to maintain the same speed and climb performance as experienced with the flat steel design.  172L also had a nose-mounted landing light, a bonded baggage door, and optional cabin skylights.  The 1972 model year introduced a plastic fairing between the dorsal fin and vertical fin to introduce a greater family resemblance to the 182's vertical fin.  1972 also introduced a reduced-diameter propeller, bonded cabin doors, and improved instrument panel controls.  1,535 built for both model years, plus 100 by Reims as the F172L.

172M

Introduced for the 1973 model year with a "Camber-Lift" wing with a drooped leading edge for improved low-speed handling, a key-locking baggage door, and new lighting switches.  The 1974 model year introduced the Skyhawk II, which was sold alongside the baseline 172M and Skyhawk models with higher standard equipment, including a second nav/comm radio, an ADF and transponder, a larger baggage compartment, and nose-mounted dual landing lights.  1975 introduced inertia-reel shoulder harnesses and an improved instrument panel and door seals.  Beginning in 1976, Cessna stopped marketing the aircraft as the 172 and began exclusively using the "Skyhawk" designation. This model year also saw a redesigned instrument panel to hold more avionics. Among other changes, the fuel and other small gauges were relocated to the left side for improved pilot readability compared with the earlier 172 panel designs.  6,826 built; 4,926 (1973–75) and 1,900 (1976), plus 610 by Reims as the F172M.

172N Skyhawk/100

1977 model year powered by a 160 horsepower (119 kW) Lycoming O-320-H2AD engine designed to run on 100-octane fuel (hence the "Skyhawk/100" name), whereas all previous engines used 80/87 fuel.  Other changes included pre-select flap control and optional rudder trim.  The 1978 model year brought a 28-volt electrical system to replace the previous 14-volt system as well as optional air conditioning.  The 1979 model year increased the flap-extension speed to 110 knots (204 km/h).  6,425 total built; 1,725 (1977), 1,725 (1978), 1,850 (1979), and 1,125 (1980), plus 525 by Reims as the F172N.

172O
There was no "O" model 172, to avoid confusion with the number zero.

172P Skyhawk P

Introduced for the 1981 model year with a Lycoming O-320-D2J engine replacing the O-320-H2AD of the 172N, which had proven unreliable.  Other changes included a decreased maximum flap deflection from 40 degrees to 30 to allow a gross weight increase from 2,300 lb (1,043 kg) to 2,400 lb (1,089 kg).  A 62 US gal (235 L) wet wing and air conditioning were optional.  The 1982 model year moved the landing lights from the nose to the wing to increase bulb life, while 1983 added some minor soundproofing improvements and thicker windows.  1984 introduced a second door latch pin, a thicker windshield and side windows, additional avionics capacity, and low-vacuum warning lights.  2,664 total built; 1,052 (1981), 724 (1982), 319 (1983), 179 (1984), 256 (1985), and 134 (1986), plus 215 by Reims as the F172P.  Following the end of 172P production in 1986, Cessna ceased production of the Skyhawk for ten years.

172Q Cutlass
Introduced for the 1983 model year, the 172Q was given the name "Cutlass" to create an affiliation with the 172RG Cutlass RG, although it was actually a 172P with a Lycoming O-360-A4N engine of 180 horsepower (134 kW).  The aircraft had a gross weight of 2,550 lb (1,157 kg) and an optimal cruise speed of 122 knots (226 km/h) compared to the 172P's cruise speed of 120 knots (222 km/h) on 20 hp (15 kW) less.  It had a useful load that was about 100 lb (45 kg) more than the Skyhawk P and a rate of climb that was actually 20 feet (6 m) per minute lower, due to the higher gross weight.  The Cutlass II was offered as a deluxe model of the 172Q, as was the Cutlass II/Nav-Pac with IFR equipment.  The 172Q was produced alongside the 172P for the 1983 and 1984 model years before being discontinued.  Sources disagree on the exact number of 172Q aircraft built, and the construction numbers listed on the Federal Aviation Administration type certificate overlap with those of the 1983 and 1984 172P.

172R Skyhawk R
The Skyhawk R was introduced in 1996 and is powered by a derated Lycoming IO-360-L2A producing a maximum of 160 horsepower (120 kW) at just 2,400 rpm. This is the first Cessna 172 to have a factory-fitted fuel-injected engine.
The 172R's maximum takeoff weight is 2,450 lb (1,111 kg). This model year introduced many improvements, including a new interior with soundproofing, an all new multi-level ventilation system, a standard four point intercom, contoured, energy absorbing, 26g front seats with vertical and reclining adjustments and inertia reel harnesses.

172S Skyhawk SP

The Cessna 172S was introduced in 1998 and is powered by a Lycoming IO-360-L2A producing 180 horsepower (134 kW). The maximum engine rpm was increased from 2,400 rpm to 2,700 rpm resulting in a 20 hp (15 kW) increase over the "R" model. As a result, the maximum takeoff weight was increased to 2,550 lb (1,157 kg). This model is marketed under the name Skyhawk SP, although the Type Certification data sheet specifies it is a 172S.
The 172S is built primarily for the private owner-operator and is, in its later years, offered with the Garmin G1000 avionics package and leather seats as standard equipment.
As of 2009, the 172S model was the only Skyhawk model in production.


### Variants under 175 type certificate
As the Cessna 175 Skylark had gained a reputation for poor engine reliability, Cessna attempted to regain sales by rebranding the aircraft as a variant of the 172. Several later 172 variants, generally those with higher-than-standard engine power or gross weight, were built under the 175 type certificate although most did not use the unpopular Continental GO-300-E engine from the 175.

P172D Powermatic

The 175 Skylark was rebranded for the 1963 model year as the P172D Powermatic, continuing where the Skylark left off at 175C. It was powered by a 175 hp (130 kW) Continental GO-300-E with a geared reduction drive powering a constant-speed propeller, increasing cruise speed by 11 mph (18 km/h) over the standard 172D. It differed from the 175C in that it had a cut-down rear fuselage with an "Omni-Vision" rear window and an increased horizontal stabilizer span. A deluxe version was marketed as the Skyhawk Powermatic with a slightly increased top speed.  Despite the rebranding, sales did not meet expectations, and the 175 type was discontinued for the civilian market after the 1963 model year.  65 were built, plus 3 by Reims as the FP172D.

R172E

Although the 175 type was discontinued for the civilian market, Cessna continued to produce the aircraft for the United States Armed Forces as the T-41 Mescalero. Introduced in 1967, the R172E was built in T-41B, T-41C, and T-41D variants for the US Army, USAF Academy, and US Military Aid Program, respectively. As the T-41B, the R172E was powered by a fuel-injected 210 hp (157 kW) Continental IO-360-D or -DE driving a constant-speed propeller, and featured a 28V electrical system, jettisonable doors, an openable right front window, a 6.00x6 nose wheel tire and military avionics, but no baggage door. The T-41C was similar to the T-41B, but had a 14V electrical system, a fixed-pitch propeller, civilian avionics, and no rear seats. The T-41D featured a 28V electrical system, four seats, corrosion-proofing, reinforced flaps and ailerons, a baggage door, and provisions for wing-mounted pylons. 255 T-41B, 45 T-41C, and 34 T-41D aircraft were built. While Cessna produced the R172E exclusively for military use, Reims built a civilian model as the FR172E Reims Rocket, with 60 built for the 1968 model year.

R172F
The R172F was similar to the R172E and was built in both T-41C and T-41D variants.  7 (T-41C) and 74 (T-41D) built, plus 85 by Reims as the FR172F Reims Rocket for the 1969 model year.

R172G
The R172G was similar to the R172E/F, differing in that it was certified to be powered by a 210 hp (157 kW) Continental IO-360-C, -D, -CB, or -DB engine.  28 (T-41D) built, plus 80 by Reims as the FR172G Reims Rocket for the 1970 model year.

R172H
The R172H introduced the extended dorsal fillet of the 172L to the T-41D.  It was also certified to be powered by a 210 hp (157 kW) Continental IO-360-C, -D, -H, -CB, -DB, or -HB engine.  163 (T-41D) built, plus 125 by Reims as the FR172H Reims Rocket for the 1971 and 1972 model years.

R172J
Certified to be powered by a 210 hp (157 kW) Continental IO-360-H or -HB engine.  Only one was built by Cessna, while Reims built 240 as the FR172J Reims Rocket for the 1973 through 1976 model years.

R172K Hawk XP

Following the success of the Reims Rocket in Europe, Cessna decided to once again produce the 175 type for the civilian market as the R172K Hawk XP, beginning with the 1977 model year.  It was powered by a derated 195 hp (145 kW) Continental IO-360-K or -KB engine driving a McCauley constant-speed propeller and featured a new cowling with landing lights and an upgraded interior.  The Hawk XP II was also available with full IFR avionics. However, owners claimed that the increased performance of the "XP" did not compensate for its increased purchase price and the higher operating costs associated with the larger engine. The aircraft was well accepted for use on floats, however, as the standard 172 is not a strong floatplane, even with only two people on board, while the XP's extra power improves water takeoff performance dramatically.  1 (1973 prototype), 725 (1977), 205 (1978), 270 (1979), 200 (1980), and 55 (1981) built, plus 85 (30 in 1977, 55 in 1978–81) by Reims as the FR172K Reims Rocket for the 1977 through 1981 model years.

172RG Cutlass RG

Cessna introduced a retractable landing gear version of the 172 in 1980, designating it as the 172RG and marketing it as the Cutlass RG.
The Cutlass RG sold for about US$19,000 more than the standard 172 and featured a variable-pitch, constant-speed propeller and a more powerful Lycoming O-360-F1A6 engine of 180 horsepower (130 kW), giving it an optimal cruise speed of 140 knots (260 km/h), compared to 122 knots (226 km/h) for the contemporary 160 horsepower (120 kW) 172N or 172P. It also had more fuel capacity than a standard Skyhawk, 62 US gallons (230 L; 52 imp gal) versus 53 US gallons (200 L; 44 imp gal), giving it greater range and endurance. 
The 172RG first flew on August 24, 1976. It was the lowest-priced four-seat retractable-gear airplane on the U.S. market when it was introduced. Although the general aviation aircraft market was contracting at the time, the RG proved popular as an inexpensive flight-school trainer for complex aircraft and commercial pilot ratings under U.S. pilot certification rules, which required demonstrating proficiency in an aircraft with retractable landing gear.
The 172RG uses the same basic landing gear as the heavier R182 Skylane RG, which Cessna touted as a benefit, saying it was a proven design; however, owners have found the landing gear to have higher maintenance requirements than comparable systems from other manufacturers, with several parts prone to rapid wear or cracking. Compared to a standard 172, the 172RG is easier to load with its center of gravity too far aft, which adversely affects the aircraft's longitudinal stability.
While numbered and marketed as a 172, the 172RG was certified on the Cessna 175 type certificate. No significant design updates were made to the 172RG during its five-year model run. 1,191 were produced.
Although it is slower and has less passenger and cargo capacity than popular competing single-engine retractable-gear aircraft such as the Beechcraft Bonanza, the Cutlass RG is praised by owners for its relatively low operating costs, robust and reliable engine, and docile flying qualities comparable to the standard 172, although it has higher landing gear maintenance and insurance costs than a fixed-gear 172.


### Special versions
J172T Turbo Skyhawk JT-A
Model introduced in July 2014 for 2015 customer deliveries, powered by a 155 hp (116 kW) Continental CD-155 diesel engine installed by the factory under a supplemental type certificate. Initial retail price in 2014 was $435,000 (~$551,508 in 2023). The model has a top speed of 131 kn (243 km/h) and burns 3 U.S. gallons (11 L; 2.5 imp gal) per hour less fuel than the standard 172. As a result, the model has an 885 nmi (1,639 km) range, an increase of more than 38% over the standard 172. This model is a development of the proposed and then canceled Skyhawk TD. Cessna has indicated that the JT-A will be made available in 2016.
In reviewing this new model Paul Bertorelli of AVweb said: "I'm sure Cessna will find some sales for the Skyhawk JT-A, but at $420,000, it's hard to see how it will ignite much market expansion just because it's a Cessna. It gives away $170,000 to the near-new Redbird Redhawk conversion which is a lot of change to pay merely for the smell of a new airplane. Diesel engines cost more than twice as much to manufacture as gasoline engines do and although their fuel efficiency gains back some of that investment, if the complete aircraft package is too pricey, the debt service will eat up any savings, making a new aircraft not just unattractive, but unaffordable. I haven't run the numbers on the JT-A yet, but I can tell from previous analysis that there are definite limits."
The model was certified by both EASA and the FAA in June 2017. It was discontinued in May 2018, due to poor sales as a result of the aircraft's high price, which was twice the price of the same aircraft as a diesel conversion. The aircraft remains available as an STC conversion from Continental Motors, Inc.

Electric-powered 172
In July 2010, Cessna announced it was developing an electrically powered 172 as a proof-of-concept in partnership with Bye Energy. In July 2011, Bye Energy, whose name had been changed to Beyond Aviation, announced the prototype had commenced taxi tests on 22 July 2011 and a first flight would follow soon.  In 2012, the prototype, using Panacis batteries, engaged in multiple successful test flights. The R&D project was not pursued for production.


### Canceled model
172TD Skyhawk TD
On October 4, 2007, Cessna announced its plan to build a diesel-powered model, to be designated the 172 Skyhawk TD ("Turbo Diesel") starting in mid-2008. The planned engine was to be a Thielert Centurion 2.0, liquid-cooled, two-liter displacement, dual overhead cam, four-cylinder, in-line, turbo-diesel with full authority digital engine control with an output of 155 hp (116 kW) and burning Jet-A fuel. In July 2013, the 172TD model was canceled due to Thielert's bankruptcy. The aircraft was later refined into the Turbo Skyhawk JT-A, which was certified in June 2014 and discontinued in May 2018.
Simulator company Redbird Flight uses the same engine and reconditioned 172 airframes to produce a similar model, the Redbird Redhawk.
Premier Aircraft Sales also announced in February 2014 that it would offer refurbished 172 airframes equipped with the Continental/Thielert Centurion 2.0 diesel engine.


## Military operators
A variant of the 172, the T-41 Mescalero was used as a trainer with the United States Air Force and Army. In addition, the United States Border Patrol uses a fleet of 172s for aerial surveillance along the Mexico-US border.
From 1972 to 2019 the Irish Air Corps used the Reims version for aerial surveillance and monitoring of cash, prisoner and explosive escorts, in addition to army cooperation and pilot training roles.

For T-41 operators, see Cessna T-41 Mescalero.

 Angola
FAPA/DAA
 Austria
Austrian Air Force 1× 172
 Bolivia
Bolivian Air Force 3× 172K
 Chile
Chilean Army 18× R172K (retired)
 Colombia
Colombian Air Force – To replace Cessna T-41s used for primary training with deliveries from June 2021.
 Ecuador
Ecuadorian Air Force 8× 172F
Ecuadorian Army 1× 172G
 Guatemala
Guatemalan Air Force 6× 172K
 Honduras
Honduran Air Force 3
 Indonesia
Indonesian Air Force Academy
 Iraq

Iraqi Air Force
 Ireland
Irish Air Corps 8× FR172H, 1× FR172K Five FR172H remained in service until 2019.
 Liberia
Air Reconnaissance Unit 2
 Lithuania
Lithuanian Air Force 1
 Madagascar
Malagasy Air Force 4× 172M
 Nicaragua
Nicaraguan Air Force 7
 Pakistan
Pakistan Air Force 4× 172N
 Philippines
Philippine Army -3 Units of 172M in In service (PA-101, PA-103 & PA-911)
Philippine Navy - 1×172F - Donated By Olympic Aviation in 2007 as PN 330. 1×172N - Purchased from Welcome Export Inc. in July 2008 as PN 331, 4x172S-  acquired from US Foreign Military Sales delivered in February 2022
 Saudi Arabia
Royal Saudi Air Force 8× F172G, 4× F172H, 4× F172M
 Singapore
Republic of Singapore Air Force 8× 172K, delivered 1969 and retired 1972.
 Suriname
Suriname Air Force (One in service for sale)


## Accidents and incidents

On February 13, 1964, Ken Hubbs, second baseman for the Chicago Cubs and winner of the Rookie of the Year Award and the Gold Glove Award, was killed when the Cessna 172 he was flying crashed near Bird Island in Utah Lake.
On October 23, 1964, David Box, lead singer for The Crickets on their 1960 release version of "Peggy Sue Got Married" and "Don't Cha Know" and later a solo artist, was killed when the Cessna 172 he was aboard crashed in northwest Harris County, Texas, while en route to a performance. Box was the second lead vocalist for The Crickets to die in a plane crash, following Buddy Holly.
On August 31, 1969, American professional boxer Rocky Marciano was killed when the Cessna 172 in which he was a passenger crashed on approach to an airfield outside Newton, Iowa.
On September 25, 1978, a Cessna 172, N7711G, and Pacific Southwest Airlines Flight 182, a Boeing 727, collided over San Diego, California. There were 144 fatalities, 2 in the Cessna 172, 135 on the PSA Flight 182 and 7 on the ground.
On May 28, 1987, a rented Reims Cessna F172P, registered D-ECJB, was used by German teenage pilot Mathias Rust in an unauthorized flight from Helsinki-Malmi Airport through Soviet airspace to land near the Red Square in Moscow, all without being intercepted by Soviet air defense.
On April 9, 1990, Atlantic Southeast Airlines Flight 2254, an Embraer EMB 120 Brasilia, collided head-on with a Civil Air Patrol Cessna 172, N99501, while en route from Gadsden Municipal Airport to Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport. The Cessna crashed, killing two occupants, but the Brasilia made a safe emergency landing.
On January 5, 2002, high school student Charles J. Bishop stole a Cessna 172, N2371N, and intentionally crashed it into the side of the Bank of America Tower in downtown Tampa, Florida, killing only himself and otherwise causing very little damage.
On April 6, 2009, a Cessna 172N, C-GFJH, belonging to Confederation College in Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada, was stolen by a student who flew it into United States airspace over Lake Superior. The 172 was intercepted and followed by NORAD F-16s, finally landing on Highway 60 in Ellsinore, Missouri, after a seven-hour flight. The student pilot, a Canadian citizen born in Turkey, Adam Dylan Leon, formerly known as Yavuz Berke, suffered from depression and was attempting to commit suicide by being shot down, but was instead arrested shortly after landing. On November 3, 2009, he was sentenced to two years in a US federal prison after pleading guilty to all three charges against him: interstate transportation of a stolen aircraft, importation of a stolen aircraft, and illegal entry into the US. College procedures at the time allowed easy access to aircraft and keys were routinely left in them.
On August 16, 2015, Cessna 172M N1285U collided in midair with a private North American Sabreliner, N442RM, on approach to Brown Field Municipal Airport in California, killing all five people on board the two aircraft. The cause was found to be air traffic control error. This accident, together with another fatal 2015 mid-air collision under similar circumstances, prompted the U.S. National Transportation Safety Board to recommend that the FAA more strongly emphasize scenario-based training for controllers.
On November 11, 2021, Glen de Vries, co-founder of Medidata Solutions and Blue Origin space tourist, died in the crash of a 172 near Hampton Township, New Jersey.
On March 5, 2024, a 172M of 99 Flying School, 5Y-NNJ, crashed after colliding with Safarilink Aviation Flight 053, a de Havilland Canada Dash 8, near Wilson Airport over Nairobi National Park, killing the instructor and student pilot aboard the 172. The Safarilink flight landed safely with no injuries to the 44 people on board.


## Specifications (172R)

Data from Cessna, FAA type certificateGeneral characteristics
Crew: one
Capacity: three passengers, 120 lb (54 kg) of baggage
Length: 27 ft 2 in (8.28 m)
Wingspan: 36 ft 1 in (11.00 m)
Height: 8 ft 11 in (2.72 m)
Wing area: 174 sq ft (16.2 m2)
Aspect ratio: 7.32
Airfoil: modified NACA 2412
Empty weight: 1,691 lb (767 kg)
Gross weight: 2,450 lb (1,111 kg)
Fuel capacity: 56 US gal (210 L) (52 US gal (200 L) usable)
Powerplant: 1 × Lycoming IO-360-L2A four cylinder, horizontally opposed aircraft engine, 160 hp (120 kW)
Propellers: 2-bladed metal, fixed pitch McCauley Model 1C235/LFA7570, 6 ft 3 in (1.91 m) diameter (maximum)
Performance

Cruise speed: 122 kn (140 mph, 226 km/h)
Stall speed: 47 kn (54 mph, 87 km/h) (power off, flaps down)
Never exceed speed: 163 kn (188 mph, 302 km/h) (IAS)
Range: 696 nmi (801 mi, 1,289 km) with 45 minute reserve, 55% power, at 12,000 feet (3,700 m)
Service ceiling: 13,500 ft (4,100 m)
Rate of climb: 721 ft/min (3.66 m/s)
Wing loading: 14.1 lb/sq ft (68.6 kg/m2)
Avionics

Optional Garmin G1000 primary flight display


## See also

1955 in aviation (first flight)
Dwane Wallace
Related development

Cessna 150
Cessna 152
Cessna 170
Cessna 175 Skylark
Cessna 177 Cardinal
Cessna T-41 Mescalero
Aircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era

Aero Commander 100
Beechcraft Musketeer
Diamond DA40
Grumman Cheetah
Piper Cherokee
Vulcanair V1.0
Yak-12

Related lists

List of aircraft
List of civil aircraft
List of most produced aircraft


## Notes


## References


### Bibliography
Andrade, John (1982). Militair 1982. London: Aviation Press Limited. ISBN 0907898017.
Fontanellaz, Adrien; Cooper, Tom; Matos, Jose Augusto (2020). War of Intervention in Angola, Volume 3: Angolan and Cuban Air Forces, 1975–1985. Warwick, UK: Helion & Company Publishing. ISBN 978-1913118617.
Hagedorn, Daniel P. (1993). Central American and Caribbean Air Forces. Tonbridge, Kent, UK: Air-Britain (Historians) Ltd. ISBN 0851302106.
Jackson, Paul (2003). Jane's All The World's Aircraft 2003–2004. Coulsdon, UK: Jane's Information Group. ISBN 0710625375.
Phillips, Edward H. (1986). Wings of Cessna: Model 120 to the Citation III. Eagan, Minnesota, US: Flying Books. ISBN 0-911139-05-2.
Simpson, R W (1991). Airlife's General Aviation. Shrewsbury, England: Airlife Publishing. ISBN 185310194X.
Simpson, Rod; Longley, Pete; Swan, Robert (2022). The General Aviation Handbook: A Guide to Millennial General Aviation Manufacturers and their Aircraft. Tonbridge, Kent, UK: Air-Britain (Trading) Limited. ISBN 978-0-85130-562-2.


## External links

Official website
Complete specifications and data for each Cessna 172 model year