The Pitts Model 12 (also known by its nicknames "Bolshoi," "Macho Stinker," and "Pitts Monster"[1]) is a high-performance)  aerobatic biplane designed around the Vedeneyev M14P/PF Russian engine. The aircraft can be built from plans or as a kit plane, or bought ready-to-fly from the factory.


## Design and development
The Pitts Model 12 was designed by Curtis Pitts starting in 1993. Pitts presented his completed design on his 80th birthday in December 1995.
The Pitts Model 12 is a biplane built using fabric covered welded steel tubing for the fuselage, and fabric covered wings with wood spars. The leading edge is made of formed plywood. The landing gear is solid aluminum.


## Operational history
As of December 2011, 59 examples had been completed and flown.


## Variants
There are several model variants:

Plans built
HP model - kit
Model 12S - factory built
A single-place variant called "The Beast" constructed by Jim Kimball


## Specifications (Pitts Model 12)
Data from Pitts model 12.comGeneral characteristics
Capacity: 2
Length: 20 ft 6 in (6.25 m)
Wingspan: 23 ft (7.0 m)
Empty weight: 1,550 lb (703 kg)
Gross weight: 2,250 lb (1,021 kg)
Fuel capacity: 54 gal
Powerplant: 1 × Vedeneyev M14P/PF , 360 hp (270 kW)
Propellers: 3-bladed MT Propeller
Performance

Cruise speed: 150 kn (170 mph, 270 km/h)
Stall speed: 56 kn (64 mph, 103 km/h)
Range: 430 nmi (500 mi, 800 km)
Rate of climb: 2,900 ft/min (15 m/s)


## References


## External links
 Media related to Pitts Model 12 at Wikimedia Commons