The Team Tango Foxtrot, or Foxtrot 4, is an American amateur-built aircraft, designed and produced by Team Tango of Williston, Florida. The aircraft is supplied as a kit for amateur construction, with or without factory builder assistance.


## Design and development
The Foxtrot was developed as a four-seat version of the Tango 2 and shares many of the two-seater's features. The Foxtrot has a cantilever low-wing, a four-seat enclosed cockpit, fixed tricycle landing gear and a single engine in tractor configuration. The rear seats have limited visibility.
The aircraft is made from composites. Its 32 ft (9.8 m) span wing employs a NACA 64-415  airfoil, has an area of 128 sq ft (11.9 m2) and mounts flaps. The engines recommended are Lycoming Engines of 200 to 350 hp (149 to 261 kW).


## Operational history
By October 2012 three examples had been registered in the United States with the Federal Aviation Administration.


## Specifications (Foxtrot)
Data from BayerlGeneral characteristics
Crew: one
Capacity: three passenger
Wingspan: 32 ft 0 in (9.75 m)
Wing area: 128 sq ft (11.9 m2)
Airfoil: NACA 64-415
Empty weight: 1,398 lb (634 kg)
Gross weight: 2,579 lb (1,170 kg)
Fuel capacity: 110 U.S. gallons (420 L; 92 imp gal)
Powerplant: 1 × Lycoming O-540 six cylinder, air-cooled, four stroke aircraft engine, 350 hp (260 kW)
Propellers: 3-bladed constant speed
Performance

Maximum speed: 229 mph (368 km/h, 199 kn)
Cruise speed: 216 mph (348 km/h, 188 kn)
Stall speed: 57 mph (92 km/h, 50 kn)
Rate of climb: 2,400 ft/min (12 m/s)
Wing loading: 20.1 lb/sq ft (98.3 kg/m2)


## References


## External links

Official website
Photo of a Foxtrot