# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Blair, Nebraska

## Date & Time: 
August 16, 2019, 09:45 Local

## Aircraft:
Bell 206

## Defining Event:
Unknown or undetermined

## Flight Conducted Under:
Public aircraft

## Accident Number:
CEN19LA269

## Registration:
N106PD

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 Minor

## Analysis

The pilot-in-command (PIC), who is also a flight instructor and was stationed in the right seat of the helicopter, decided to conduct emergency procedure training with a simulated governor failure of the turboshaft engine before returning to the airport to land. The co-pilot, who is not a flight instructor, was stationed in the left seat. The intent was to recover from the simulated governor failure at a safe airspeed and altitude. The PIC initiated a simulated governor failure by rolling the throttle down just enough to take the governor offline but still maintain the main rotor rpm in the green (normal) range. The helicopter descended while maintaining airspeed until over the runway. About 40 ft above ground level and about 45 knots, the PIC announced his intention to complete the training maneuver and rolled the throttle back to the full open position. The PIC verbally confirmed the main rotor rpm indication in the green range. All other indications in the helicopter appeared to be normal to the PIC.

As the helicopter was in normal operating conditions, the PIC applied aft cyclic to slow down and begin air taxiing to the parking pad to the east (right) of their current position. At that moment, he heard the low main rotor rpm audible horn. The PIC confirmed a loss of engine power by referencing indications in the cockpit. The helicopter descended very rapidly toward the ground and the PIC surmised the engine was unable to produce power. The PIC reduced the collective briefly to regain main rotor energy then applied collective to cushion the landing. The helicopter impacted the runway and came to rest on its left side, which resulted in substantial damage.

A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. Based on the available evidence, the loss of main rotor rpm could not be determined.

## Probable Cause and Findings

---

# The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The loss of main rotor rpm for reasons that could not be determined based on the available evidence, which resulted in a hard landing.

## Findings

| | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |
| --- | --- |
| Not determined | |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Event | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Maneuvering-low-alt flying | Simulated/training event |
| Maneuvering-low-alt flying | Miscellaneous/other |
| Maneuvering-low-alt flying | Unknown or undetermined (Defining event) |
| Autorotation | Attempted remediation/recovery |
| Landing | Collision during takeoff/land |

On August 16, 2019, about 0945 central daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N106PD, sustained substantial damage when it was involved in an accident near Blair, Nebraska. The two commercial pilots sustained minor injuries. The helicopter was operated as a Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations public aircraft flight.

According to the Omaha Police Department Air Support Unit, the helicopter departed Blair Municipal Airport (BTA), Blair, Nebraska, for a patrol flight over Omaha, Nebraska. After about 1 hour of flight, the helicopter headed back to BTA. About 4 miles south of runway 31 at BTA, the pilot-in-command (PIC), who is also a flight instructor and was stationed in the right seat, decided to conduct emergency procedure training with a simulated governor failure of the turboshaft engine prior to landing back to the airport. The co-pilot, who is not a flight instructor, was stationed in the left seat. Since a training event was being conducted, the intent was to recover from the simulated governor failure at a safe airspeed and altitude before executing a normal landing.

The PIC initiated a simulated governor failure by rolling the throttle down just enough to take the governor offline, but still maintaining the main rotor rpm in the green (normal) range. The helicopter descended while maintaining airspeed until over the runway. About 40 ft above ground level and about 45 knots, the PIC announced his intention to complete the training maneuver and rolled the throttle back to the full open position. The PIC confirmed the main rotor rpm indication in the green range, which he verbally announced. All other indications in the helicopter appeared to be normal to the PIC.

As the helicopter was in normal operating conditions, the PIC applied aft cyclic to slow down and began air taxiing to the parking pad to the east (right) of their current position. At that moment, he heard the low main rotor rpm audible horn. The PIC confirmed a loss of engine power by referencing indications in the cockpit. The helicopter descended very rapidly toward the ground and the PIC surmised the engine was unable to produce power. The PIC reduced the collective briefly to regain main rotor energy and then applied collective to cushion the landing. The helicopter impacted the runway and came to rest on its left side. The PIC reported it was unknown if the engine was stilling running after the helicopter came to rest. The PIC executed an emergency shutdown and both pilots egressed from the helicopter without further incident. The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the main rotor system, the fuselage, the tailboom, and the tail rotor system.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate:
Commercial

## Age:
42,Male

## Airplane Rating(s):
None

## Seat Occupied:
Right

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Restraint Used:
4-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
June 18, 2019

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
April 30, 2019

## Flight Time:
4115 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3950 hours (Total, this make and model), 4115 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 44 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 23 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Co-pilot Information

## Certificate:
Commercial

## Age:
46,Male

## Airplane Rating(s):
None

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Restraint Used:
4-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
June 30, 2018

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
April 15, 2019

## Flight Time:

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: 
Bell

## Registration:
N106PD

## Model/Series:
206 B

## Aircraft Category:
Helicopter

## Year of Manufacture:
2008

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
4649

## Landing Gear Type:
High skid

## Seats:
5

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
August 5, 2019 Continuous airworthiness

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3350 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Turbo shaft

## Airframe Total Time:
4913.8 Hrs at time of accident

## Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce

## ELT:
C126 installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident

## Engine Model/Series:
M250-C20J

## Registered Owner:
Omaha Police Department

## Rated Power:
420 Horsepower

## Operator:
Omaha Police Department

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBTA,1299 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
14:35 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
178°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear

## Visibility
10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
 / 

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
None / None

## Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
N/A / N/A

## Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 18°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Blair, NE (BTA )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Blair, NE (BTA )

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Departure Time:
08:30 Local

## Type of Airspace:
Class G

---

# Airport Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Airport: | Blair Muni BTA |
| Airport Elevation: | 1317 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 31 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 4201 ft / 100 ft |

| | |
|-|-|
| Runway Surface Type: | Concrete |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing;Full stop;Straight-in |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 2 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: | - |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 Minor |

| | |
|-|-|
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 41.415,-96.109169(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Hodges, Michael

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Scott Olson; FAA Lincoln FSDO; Lincoln, NE
* Allen Straub; Omaha Police Department; Blair, NE
* Jack Johnson; Rolls-Royce Corporation; Indianapolis, IN
* Beverley Harvey (Accredited Representative); Transportation Safety Board of Canada; Gatineau
* Mona Polson (Technical Advisor); Bell Flight; Fort Worth, TX

## Original Publish Date:
February 16, 2022

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class 3

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100068](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100068)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).