# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Tampa, Florida

## Date & Time: 
August 21, 2019, 12:35 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 310

## Defining Event:
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ERA19LA255

## Registration:
N2299F

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

During the landing approach, the pilot noted that the right main landing gear would not extend into the down and locked position, and, during touchdown, the gear began to collapse. He performed a go-around, climbed to altitude, and attempted emergency procedures and g-loading maneuvers but was unable to extend the right main landing gear into the down and locked position. Ultimately, the pilot chose to land with the landing gear retracted. During recovery of the airplane from the runway, maintenance personnel were unable to extend and lock the right main landing gear, but they were able to extend and lock the nose and left main landing gears into position. The right main landing gear was manually extended and braced, then towed to the ramp. The pilot/operator of the aircraft reported that the damage to the aircraft was substantial.

A complete examination of the right main landing gear was not performed; therefore, the reason for the right main landing gear anomaly could not be determined.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The failure of the right main landing gear to fully extend and lock for reasons that could not be determined.

---

# Findings

## Not determined
(general) - Unknown/Not determined

## Aircraft
(general) - Not specified

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Approach | Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power) (Defining event) |
| --- | --- |
| Approach-VFR pattern final | Miscellaneous/other |
| Approach-VFR go-around | Miscellaneous/other |
| Landing | Landing gear not configured |

On August 21, 2019, about 1235 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 310L, N2299F, was substantially damaged when it was involved in an accident near Tampa, Florida. The commercial pilot was not injured. The airplane was operated as a Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.

The pilot stated that, while on landing approach, the right main landing gear would not indicate down and locked. He "wiggled" the light for the right main landing gear and changed the light bulb, but the right main landing gear did not indicate down and locked. He continued the approach and landed, but during the landing roll, the right main landing gear began to collapse. He aborted the landing and climbed to altitude, where he cycled the landing gear and tried to extend the right main landing gear using the emergency gear extension procedure multiple times. He also attempted abrupt maneuvers but was unable to get the right main landing gear down and locked. He then attempted a second landing, with the same results.

After the aborted second landing, he contacted air traffic control, declared an emergency, and diverted to a tower-controlled airport. He performed one low pass and one fly-by of the air traffic control tower and was told that the right main landing gear appeared to be down. He returned for landing and, during landing, again felt the right main landing gear was collapsing. He aborted the landing then informed the tower controller that he would land gear-up. He subsequently performed a gear-up landing. The pilot/operator subsequently reported that the damage to the aircraft was substantial.

During recovery of the airplane, airport maintenance personnel were unable to lock the right main landing gear using the emergency gear extension system but were able to manually push the gear over-center and brace it. They also secured the nose and left main landing gear over-center with heavy tie wraps and towed the airplane to the ramp.

The airplane was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector following recovery. The inspector reported that he could not determine the reason the right main landing gear would not go into the down and locked position; however, no disassembly was performed to gain access to all components of the right main landing gear retraction and extension system.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: Commercial
## Age: 24,Male
## Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine land; Multi-engine land
## Seat Occupied: Left
## Other Aircraft Rating(s): None
## Restraint Used: Lap only
## Instrument Rating(s): Airplane
## Second Pilot Present: No
## Instructor Rating(s): None
## Toxicology Performed: No
## Medical Certification: Class 1 Without waivers/limitations
## Last FAA Medical Exam: February 14, 2019
## Occupational Pilot: Yes
## Last Flight Review or Equivalent: April 27, 2019
## Flight Time: 1195 hours (Total, all aircraft), 120 hours (Total, this make and model), 331 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 128 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Cessna
## Registration: N2299F
## Model/Series: 310 L
## Aircraft Category: Airplane
## Year of Manufacture: 1967
## Amateur Built:
## Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
## Serial Number: 310L-0099
## Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle
## Seats: 6
## Date/Type of Last Inspection: November 15, 2018 Annual
## Certified Max Gross Wt.: 5200 lbs
## Time Since Last Inspection: 4 Hrs
## Engines: 2 Reciprocating
## Airframe Total Time: 2486.3 Hrs at time of accident
## Engine Manufacturer: Continental
## ELT: Installed, not activated
## Engine Model/Series: IO-470-V
## Registered Owner: On file
## Rated Power: 260 Horsepower
## Operator: On file
## Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Visual (VMC) | Condition of Light: Day |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | TPA,26 ft msl |
| Observation Time: | 12:53 Local |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Scattered / 3500 ft AGL |
| Lowest Ceiling: | Visibility (RVR): |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 8 knots / Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: None / None |
| Wind Direction: | 160° Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: N/A / N/A |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30.1 inches Hg |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Perry, GA (PXE ) |
| Destination: | Tampa, FL (TPA ) |
| Departure Time: | 10:13 Local |

## Airport Information
| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Tampa International Airport TPA |
| Airport Elevation: | 26 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 19L |
| Runway Length/Width: | 8300 ft / 150 ft |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt;Concrete |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Full stop;Traffic pattern |

## Wreckage and Impact Information
| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 27.978889,-82.528335(est) |

Page 5 of 6 ERA19LA255

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Monville, Timothy

## Additional Participating Persons:
Gregory King; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL

## Original Publish Date:
March 23, 2022

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class 3

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100118](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100118)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.