# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Titusville, Florida

## Date & Time: 
January 16, 2020, 13:30 Local

## Aircraft:
RANS S12

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ERA20LA079

## Registration:
N73KA

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

According to the pilot, during the initial climbout about 200 ft above ground level, the engine stopped. The pilot made a 180° turn and attempted to land. The airplane impacted the ground and flipped over inverted. Examination of the airplane revealed that the cockpit and fuselage were crushed. Both horizontal stabilizers were bent upward and buckled. A postaccident examination of the engine and its components, which included several successful engine runs, revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined based on available evidence.

## Findings

Not determined (general) - Unknown/Not determined

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

Initial climb | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)

On January 16, 2020, about 1330 eastern standard time, an experimental amateur-built RANS S12XL airplane, N73KA, was substantially damaged when it was involved in an accident at Arthur Dunn Air Park (X21), Titusville, Florida. The private pilot was not injured. The airplane was operated as a personal flight under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.

According to the pilot, during the initial climbout about 200 ft above ground level, the engine stopped. The pilot made a 180° descending left turn, while maintaining 60 mph. While attempting to flare and land, the nose and left main gear impacted the ground. The airplane flipped over and came to rest inverted.

Examination of the airplane revealed that the cockpit and fuselage were crushed upward. Both horizontal stabilizers were bent upward and buckled. Examination of the engine and its components, which included several successful engine runs, revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.

## Pilot Information

Certificate: | Private
--- | ---
Age: | 65,Female
Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land
Seat Occupied: | Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None
Restraint Used: | 3-point
Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane
Second Pilot Present: | No
Instructor Rating(s): | None
Toxicology Performed: | No
Medical Certification: | Class 3 Without waivers/limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam: | December 9, 2019
Occupational Pilot: | UNK
Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | 
Flight Time: | (Estimated) 1147 hours (Total, all aircraft), 325 hours (Total, this make and model), 1085 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 13 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: RANS
Registration: N73KA

## Model/Series: S12 XL
Aircraft Category: Airplane

## Year of Manufacture: 1999
Amateur Built: Yes

## Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental (Special)
Serial Number: 10980858

## Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 2

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
March 28, 2019 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 1100 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection: 
25 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
361 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: Viking

## ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series: 90

## Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power: 90 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
KX21,30 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
13:25 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 0°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 4000 ft AGL
Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
6 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: None / None

## Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: N/A / N/A

## Altimeter Setting:
30.25 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 27°C / 18°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Titusville, FL (X21 )
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination:
Titusville, FL (X21 )
Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
13:30 Local
Type of Airspace: Class G

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Arthur Dunn Air Park X21 |
| Airport Elevation: | 30 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 04 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 1805 ft / 100 ft |
| Runway Surface Type: | Grass/turf |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | - |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 28.622499,-80.835281(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alleyne, Eric

## Additional Participating Persons:
Blake R James; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL

## Original Publish Date:
April 21, 2022

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class 3

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100823](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100823)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).