# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Broomfield, Colorado

## Date & Time: 
February 12, 2020, 21:15 Local

## Aircraft:
Piaggio P180

## Defining Event:
Runway excursion

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation

## Accident Number:
CEN20LA083

## Registration:
N677P

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
4 None

## Analysis

The private pilot was making an instrument approach at night in instrument meteorological conditions. The control tower advised that packed snow and moderate braking were reported on the runway. The pilot reported that the approach was on speed and the airplane initially touched down smoothly. When the nosewheel touched down, the airplane yawed to the left, and the pilot's efforts to maintain directional control were not successful. The airplane slid on the surface, departed the left side of the runway, and spun around, then the right wing tip and canard contacted the ground, resulting in substantial damage to the right wing, canard, and aileron.

Postaccident examination revealed both nose gear tires were deflated, and the right main tire had low air pressure. However, the pilot did not report any pre-accident mechanical malfunction or anomaly with the airplane that may have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's loss of directional control on the snow-covered runway, which resulted in a runway excursion.

---

# Findings

## Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot

## Environmental issues
Snow/slush/ice covered surface - Effect on operation

## Aircraft
Directional control - Not attained/maintained

## Aircraft
Surface speed/braking - Not attained/maintained

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Landing-landing roll | Runway excursion (Defining event) |
| --- | --- |

On February 12, 2020, about 2115 mountain standard time, a Piaggio P180, N677P, went off the left side of runway 30R after landing at Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport (BJC), Broomfield, Colorado. The private pilot and his three passengers were not injured. The airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to JMC Air, LLC, Dillsburgh, Pennsylvania, and operated by the pilot under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a business flight. Night instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed. The flight originated from Bob Hope Airport (BUR), Burbank, California, at 1745 Pacific standard time, and was destined for BJC.

According to the pilot's statement, the control tower advised that there was packed snow on the runway and moderate braking was reported. The approach was made at 130 knots (Vref +10). He observed the runway lights at 6,800 ft and touched down smoothly about 112 knots. When the nose wheel touched down, the airplane yawed to the left. Right rudder was applied, but the airplane continued to drift left of centerline. Both propellers were in beta range, and he placed the right propeller into reverse in an attempt to move the nose to the right. Brakes were also applied but to no avail. The airplane slid on the surface and departed the left side of the runway and skidded through the snow. The airplane spun in the snow and the right wing tip and canard contacted the ground. Post-accident examination revealed both nose gear tires were deflated and the right main tire was low on air. The right aileron was also damaged. The pilot did not report any pre-accident mechanical malfunction or anomaly with the airplane that may have contributed to the accident.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Private

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
February 22, 2018

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
January 22, 2020

## Flight Time:
1829 hours (Total, all aircraft), 38 hours (Total, this make and model), 1704 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 36 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 31 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Piaggio

## Registration:
N677P

## Model/Series:
P180 Avanti

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
1992

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
1019

## Landing Gear Type:
Tricycle

## Seats:
10

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
March 19, 2019 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
12100 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 2 Turbo prop

## Airframe Total Time:
5256 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney

## ELT:
C126 installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
PT6A SER

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
800 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Instrument (IMC) | Condition of Light: Night |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | BJC,5673 ft msl |
| Observation Time: | 21:28 Local |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Visibility 1 miles |
| Lowest Ceiling: | Overcast / 600 ft AGL |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 5 knots / |
| Wind Direction: | 40° |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30.04 inches Hg |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | - |
| Departure Point: | Burbank, CA (BUR ) |
| Destination: | Broomfield, CO (BJC ) |
| Departure Time: | 17:45 Local |

## Airport Information
| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Rocky Mountain Metropolitan BJC |
| Airport Elevation: | 5673 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 30R |
| Runway Length/Width: | 9000 ft / 100 ft |
| Runway Surface Type: | Concrete |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Snow;Wet |
| IFR Approach: | ILS |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | None |

## Wreckage and Impact Information
| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | 3 None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 4 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 39.93111,-105.120002(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Scott, Arnold

## Additional Participating Persons:
Scott Farron; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Denver, CO

## Original Publish Date:
May 5, 2021

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class 3

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100945](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=100945)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.