# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Cabool, Missouri

## Date & Time: 
February 29, 2020, 15:34 Local

## Aircraft:
Zenith CH601

## Defining Event:
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN20LA107

## Registration:
N601ND

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

The pilot of the personal flight stated that, after departure, the cockpit filled with smoke and the airplane then experienced a total loss of engine power. The pilot attempted to return to the departure airport but landed in a field short of the airport runway; the airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings. Postaccident examination of the engine revealed the No. 1 piston was broken in two pieces, and the piston crank link was bent. The reason for the failures was unknown.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The loss of engine power due to failure of the No. 1 cylinder piston for reasons that could not be determined based on available evidence.

## Findings

| Item | Finding |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft | Recip eng cyl section - Failure |
| Aircraft | Recip eng cyl section - Unknown/Not determined |
| Environmental issues | (general) - Contributed to outcome |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

Enroute | Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail (Defining event)
--- | ---
Enroute | Unknown or undetermined
Enroute | Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent | Off-field or emergency landing
Landing | Collision during takeoff/land

On February 29, 2020, at 1534 central standard time, an experimental amateur-built Zodiac 601XLB, N601ND, was involved in an accident near Cabool Memorial Airport (TVB), Cabool, Missouri. The pilot and passenger were uninjured. The airplane was operated as a Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.

According to the pilot, the cockpit "suddenly" filled with black smoke after departing TVB. The engine then sputtered and ceased operating. He attempted to return to TVB but landed in a field short of the runway. The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings.

Postaccident examination of the engine revealed the No. 1 cylinder piston was broken in two pieces, and the piston crank link was bent. The reason for the failures was unknown.

## Pilot Information

Certificate: | Commercial
--- | ---
Age: | 84,Male
Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land
Seat Occupied: | Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None
Restraint Used: | 3-point
Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane
Second Pilot Present: | No
Instructor Rating(s): | None
Toxicology Performed: | No
Medical Certification: | None
Last FAA Medical Exam: | 
Occupational Pilot: | No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | February 23, 2020
Flight Time: | 4024 hours (Total, all aircraft), 165 hours (Total, this make and model), 3976 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

---

# Passenger Information

| Certificate: | Age: |
| --- | --- |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Seat Occupied: Right |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | Restraint Used: |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Second Pilot Present: No |
| Instructor Rating(s): | Toxicology Performed: |
| Medical Certification: | Last FAA Medical Exam: |
| Occupational Pilot: | Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |
| Flight Time: |

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | Zenith | Registration: | N601ND |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Model/Series: | CH601 XL | Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Year of Manufacture: | 2013 | Amateur Built: | Yes |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Experimental (Special) | Serial Number: | 6-6444 |
| Landing Gear Type: | Tricycle | Seats: | 2 |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | May 7, 2019 Condition | Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 1320 lbs |
| Time Since Last Inspection: | Engines: | 1 Reciprocating |
| Airframe Total Time: | 163 Hrs at time of accident | Engine Manufacturer: | Jabiru |
| ELT: | Engine Model/Series: | 3300A |
| Registered Owner: | On file | Rated Power: |  |
| Operator: | On file | Operating Certificate(s) Held: | None |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)
- Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- UNO,1228 ft msl
- Distance from Accident Site: 17 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 14:53 Local
- Direction from Accident Site: 145°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Clear
- Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- 6 knots /
- Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: None /

## Wind Direction:
- 200°
- Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: /

## Altimeter Setting:
- 30.18 inches Hg
- Temperature/Dew Point: 13°C / -1°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
- No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
- Cabool, MO (TVB )
- Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination:
- Rolla/Vichy, MO (VIH)
- Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
- 15:00 Local
- Type of Airspace: Class D

# Airport Information

## Airport:
- Cabool Memorial Airport TVB
- Runway Surface Type:

## Airport Elevation:
- 1220 ft msl
- Runway Surface Condition: Dry;Vegetation

## Runway Used:
- IFR Approach: None

## Runway Length/Width:
- VFR Approach/Landing: Forced landing

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
- 1 None
- Aircraft Damage: Substantial

## Passenger Injuries:
- 1 None
- Aircraft Fire: None

## Ground Injuries:
- Aircraft Explosion: None

## Total Injuries:
- 2 None
- Latitude, Longitude: 37.132499,-92.083885(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Gallo, Mitchell

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Travis Schwien; Federal Aviation Administration; St Louis FSDO; St Ann, MO
* Danny Brickey; Federal Aviation Administration; Little Rock FSDO; Little Rock, AR

## Original Publish Date:
March 11, 2022

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class 3

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=101016](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=101016)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.