# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Fresno, California

## Date & Time: 
May 2, 2020, 09:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 172

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR20LA136

## Registration:
N734NW

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 Minor

## Analysis

Shortly after takeoff on runway 30, as the airplane reached about 300 to 400 ft above ground level, the engine lost partial power. The pilot prepared for a downwind landing to runway 12 and when he realized the airplane had excess energy, he deployed the flaps and performed a forward slip maneuver. The airplane touched down about halfway down the runway and continued off the end and through a fence. The airplane then passed over the two westbound lanes of a road and nosed over in the median.

Examination of the engine revealed low compression on two of the six cylinders (around 25 to 75 percent compression loss on cylinder numbers 3 and 5). The valve rocker arms were tapped with a rubber mallet and compression recovered to approximately 25 percent loss in the number 3 cylinder and 15 percent loss in the number 5 cylinder. An internal borescope examination of the engine cylinders revealed the piston tops and cylinder sidewalls appeared normal and no evidence of foreign object ingestion was observed. No other pre-impact mechanical anomalies were identified during the examination.

Although the reason for the low compression could not be determined, it was noted that the engine was disassembled 1.9 hours before the accident flight.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

---

# Findings

| | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |
| --- | --- |
| Not determined | |

The partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined based on available evidence.

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Takeoff | Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event) |

On May 2, 2020, about 0930 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N734NW, was substantially damaged when it was involved in an accident near Sierra Sky Park Airport (E79), Fresno, California. The pilot sustained minor injuries. The airplane was operated as a Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.

The pilot stated the airplane had recently undergone maintenance; this was to be the third flight after the maintenance, and he planned to stay in the local area. He conducted a preflight inspection and observed 28 gallons of fuel in the fuel tanks; he also confirmed there was no contamination in the fuel by visually checking the fuel strainer.

The pilot estimated the wind was about 9 to 10 knots straight down runway 30 (headwind). He initiated a takeoff and when the airplane reached about 300 to 400 ft above ground level, the engine power began to fluctuate. The engine then remained at "low" power and the pilot pitched the airplane to maintain 70 to 80 knots of airspeed. He prepared for a downwind landing on runway 12 and when he realized the airplane had excess energy, he deployed the flaps and performed a forward slip maneuver. The airplane touched down about halfway down the runway and continued off the end and through a fence. The airplane then passed over the two westbound lanes of a road and nosed over in the median.

A postaccident examination was performed on the airplane and engine. The crankshaft was rotated by hand using the propeller. Rotational continuity was established throughout the engine and valve train. Equal movement was observed on all of the intake and exhaust valve rocker arms. Thumb compression and suction was obtained on four of the six cylinders. Cylinder numbers 3 and 5 had very minimal thumb compression. A differential pressure gauge was connected to the numbers 3 and 5 cylinders, which exhibited around 25 to 75 percent compression loss. The valve rocker arms were tapped with a rubber mallet, and compression recovered to approximately 25 percent loss in the number 3 cylinder and 15 percent loss in the number 5 cylinder. An internal borescope examination of the engine cylinders revealed the piston tops and cylinder sidewalls appeared normal. No evidence of foreign object ingestion was observed.

Examination of the fuel strainer revealed the drain pull handle used for draining the strainer was inoperable. An examination of the fuel strainer found the drain valve cable to be dirty without evidence of frequent actuation (the cable showed no signs of sliding in and out of the cable housing). The fuel strainer drain valve cable was disconnected and the drain valve was opened manually without restriction. The fuel strainer housing (bowl) was removed, and the internal screen was free of debris. The fuel remaining in the strainer bowl was clear and bright.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate:
Private

## Age:
63,Male

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
May 10, 2018

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
May 17, 2018

## Flight Time:
(Estimated) 784 hours (Total, all aircraft), 696 hours (Total, this make and model), 784 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Cessna

## Registration:
N734NW

## Model/Series:
172 N

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
1977

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
17268993

## Landing Gear Type:
Tricycle

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
April 7, 2020 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2299 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
1.9 Hrs

## Engines:
1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
3515 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
PZL Franklin

## ELT:
C91 installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident

## Engine Model/Series:
6A-350-C1R

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
220 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
- Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- FCH,276 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
- 7 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 17:30 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
- 159°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Clear

## Visibility:
- 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- None

## Visibility (RVR):
-  

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- 10 knots /  

## Wind Direction:
- 310°

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
-  / 

## Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
-  / 

## Altimeter Setting:
- 30.09 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
- 21°C / 10°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
- No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
- Fresno, CA

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
- None

## Destination:
- Fresno, CA

## Type of Clearance:
- None

## Departure Time:
- Type of Airspace: Class G

# Airport Information

## Airport:
- SIERRA SKY PARK E79

## Airport Elevation:
- 321 ft msl

## Runway Used:
- 12

## Runway Length/Width:
- 2473 ft / 50 ft

## Runway Surface Type:
- Asphalt

## Runway Surface Condition:
- Dry

## IFR Approach:
- None

## VFR Approach/Landing:
- Forced landing

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
- 1 Minor

## Passenger Injuries:
-  

## Ground Injuries:
-  

## Total Injuries:
- 1 Minor

## Aircraft Damage:
- Substantial

## Aircraft Fire:
- None

## Aircraft Explosion:
- None

## Latitude, Longitude:
- 36.840278,-119.869445(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Smith, Maja

## Additional Participating Persons:
Fritz Bayer; FSDO; Fresno, CA

## Original Publish Date:
June 14, 2022

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class 3

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=101227](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=101227)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.