# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Red Oak, Iowa

## Date & Time: 
July 14, 2012, 17:50 Local

## Aircraft:
Robinson Helicopter Company R44 II

## Defining Event:
Collision during takeoff/land

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural

## Accident Number:
CEN12LA443

## Registration:
N556MM

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis
The pilot reported that he was unable to activate the motorized spray system after arriving at the field to be sprayed. He returned to the departure location in order to troubleshoot the inoperative spray system. As he maneuvered the helicopter to land next to a ground-support vehicle, the main rotor system impacted a landing platform installed on top of the vehicle. The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation of the helicopter. The wind near the time of the accident was reported as calm. In the absence of any mechanical malfunctions or adverse atmospheric conditions, the pilot should have been able to maintain proper distance from the known obstacle.

## Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the ground-support vehicle during landing.

## Findings
Environmental issues | Ground vehicle - Response/compensation
--- | ---
Personnel issues | Monitoring environment - Pilot

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Landing-flare/touchdown | Collision during takeoff/land (Defining event) |

On July 14, 2012, at 1750 central daylight time, a Robinson Helicopter Company model R44 II, N556MM, was substantially damaged when it impacted a ground-support vehicle while landing near Red Oak, Iowa. The commercial pilot was not injured. The helicopter was registered to and operated by Johnson Helicopter Services LLC, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 without a flight plan. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local aerial-application flight that originated from an agricultural field near Red Oak, Iowa, about 1745.

The pilot reported that after takeoff he was unable to activate the motorized spray system after arriving at the field to be sprayed. He returned to the departure location in order to troubleshoot the inoperative spray system. As he maneuvered the helicopter to land next to a ground-support vehicle, the main rotor system impacted a landing platform installed on top of the vehicle. The pilot reported that after the impact there was a vibration throughout the helicopter and elevated cyclic stick pressures. The main rotor system, tail boom, and fuselage were damaged during the accident sequence. The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation of the helicopter.

The closest weather observing station was at Red Oak Municipal Airport (KRDK), located about 5 miles south of the accident site. At 1755, the KRDK automated surface observing system reported the following weather conditions: calm wind, visibility 10 miles, temperature 33 degrees Celsius, dew point 22 degrees Celsius, altimeter setting 29.97 inches of mercury. The sky condition was not reported.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Commercial; Flight instructor

## Age:
31,Male

## Airplane Rating(s):
None

## Seat Occupied:
Right

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Restraint Used:

## Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
Helicopter; Instrument helicopter

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
June 22, 2012

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
June 17, 2011

## Flight Time:
1327 hours (Total, all aircraft), 562 hours (Total, this make and model), 1247 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 87 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Robinson Helicopter Company

## Registration:
N556MM

## Model/Series:
R44 II

## Aircraft Category:
Helicopter

## Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted (Special)

## Serial Number:
10111

## Landing Gear Type:
Skid

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
July 3, 2012 100 hour

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
910 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-AE1A5

## Registered Owner:
Johnson Helicopter Services, LLC.

## Rated Power:
245 Horsepower

## Operator:
Johnson Helicopter Services, LLC.

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
KRDK,1045 ft msl

## Observation Time:
17:55 Local

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Visibility 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
/ 

## Wind Direction:
/ 

## Altimeter Setting:
29.96 inches Hg

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Red Oak, IA

## Destination:
Red Oak, IA

## Departure Time:
17:45 Local

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
1 None

## Passenger Injuries:

## Ground Injuries:
N/A

## Total Injuries:
1 None

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles

## Direction from Accident Site:
180°

## Visibility (RVR):

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
/ 

## Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
/ 

## Temperature/Dew Point:
33°C / 22°C

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Type of Airspace:
Class G

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Aircraft Fire:
None

## Aircraft Explosion:
None

## Latitude, Longitude:
41.086112,-95.263053

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Fox, Andrew

## Additional Participating Persons:
Jeffrey Rock; Federal Aviation Administration - Des Moines FSDO; Ankeny, IA

## Original Publish Date:
October 9, 2012

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84323](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84323)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](here).