# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Neilsville, Wisconsin

## Date & Time: 
July 20, 2012, 09:15 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-11

## Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN12CA468

## Registration:
N4844M

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

After touching down, the pilot noticed that the airplane was not aligned with the runway and decided to abort the landing. The airplane turned left of the runway toward a cornfield, and the pilot applied power and pulled up. The airplane stalled and collided with the cornfield. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, an engine mount, the wing struts, and the left wing spar. The pilot reported there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot did not maintain control of the airplane during an attempted aborted landing, which resulted in an inadvertent stall.

## Findings

| Personnel issues | Aircraft control - Pilot |
| --- | --- |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight
| Landing-landing roll | Abnormal runway contact |
| Landing-aborted after touchdown | Loss of control on ground (Defining event) |

## Pilot Information
| Certificate: | Private |
| Age: | 62,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Seat Occupied: |  |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | February 3, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot: | Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | February 4, 2012 |
| Flight Time: | 746 hours (Total, all aircraft), 11 hours (Total, this make and model) |

## Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
| Aircraft Make: | Piper |
| Registration: | N4844M |
| Model/Series: | PA-11 |
| Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Year of Manufacture: | Amateur Built: |  |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Normal |
| Serial Number: | 11-361 |
| Landing Gear Type: | Tailwheel |
| Seats: | 2 |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | August 1, 2011 Annual |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 1220 lbs |
| Time Since Last Inspection: | Engines: | 1 Reciprocating |
| Airframe Total Time: | 3785 Hrs as of last inspection |
| Engine Manufacturer: | CONT MOTOR |
| ELT: | Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident |
| Engine Model/Series: | C90 SERIES |
| Registered Owner: | GAIER JEFFREY H |
| Rated Power: | 95 Horsepower |
| Operator: | Steven Humphrey |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | None |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
MFI,1278 ft msl

## Observation Time:
08:45 Local

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear

## Lowest Ceiling:
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point: 24°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:

## Departure Point:
Marshfield, WI (MFI )

## Destination:
Neilsville, WI (VIQ )

## Departure Time:
09:00 Local

# Airport Information

## Airport:
Neillsville VIQ

## Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Type:
Runway Surface Condition:

## Runway Used:
20
IFR Approach: None
VFR Approach/Landing:

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
1 None

## Passenger Injuries:

## Ground Injuries:
N/A

## Total Injuries:
1 None

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Aircraft Fire:
None

## Aircraft Explosion:
None

## Latitude, Longitude:
44.554721,-90.507225(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Yeager, Leah

## Additional Participating Persons:
Peter Corrao; FAA/FSDO; Milwaukee, WI

## Original Publish Date:
November 26, 2012

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84412](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84412)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).