# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Westerly, Rhode Island

## Date & Time: 
July 23, 2012, 15:02 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-25-235

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Banner tow

## Accident Number:
ERA12LA474

## Registration:
N7313Z

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 Minor

## Analysis

About 12 minutes into a local banner towing flight, while flying 650 feet above the ocean, the airplane's engine began running roughly. The pilot responded by increasing the throttle to full, richening the mixture, and applying carburetor heat, all to no avail. Shortly thereafter, the engine lost power completely, so the pilot performed a forced landing to the ocean and was later rescued by civilian boaters. The airplane was recovered from the ocean more than 1 week after the accident. The pilot/operator was able to perform a cursory inspection of the engine at the time, but no definitive cause for the loss of power was identified. Due to the salt water-damaged state of the engine, no further detailed examination could be completed. At the time of the accident, the engine had accumulated nearly 2,300 hours since its most recent overhaul and 150 hours since its most recent annual inspection. Weather conditions at an airport 6 miles from the accident location were conducive to the formation of serious carburetor ice at glide power settings.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined due to the postaccident salt water-damaged state of the engine.

---

# Findings

| | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |
| --- | --- |
| Not determined | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Enroute | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Ditching |

On July 23, 2012, at 1502 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-25, N7313Z, registered to and operated by Simmons Aviation, was substantially damaged following a forced landing into the Atlantic Ocean, near Westerly, Rhode Island. The certificated airline transport certificated pilot was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the local flight, which originated from Westerly State Airport (WST), Westerly, Rhode Island, about 1445. The banner tow flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.

The pilot stated that he departed with 25 gallons of fuel for a 45-minute flight, and had not taken on any fuel that day. About 12 minutes into the flight, and while flying at an altitude of about 600 feet, the engine began running "roughly" and sounded as though it misfired. After about 20 seconds, the pilot responded by increasing engine power to full, richening the mixture, and applying carburetor heat. Shortly after, the engine experienced a total loss of power. The pilot subsequently ditched the airplane into the ocean with the banner still attached, approximately 6 miles from shore. The pilot transmitted a distress call, and was later rescued by a civilian boat.

The airplane was recovered from the ocean on July 31, 2012. The pilot performed a cursory examination of the engine and noted that the crankshaft was free to rotate, and oil was present within the engine case. The pilot reported that there was an unspecified "problem" with a valve of the number 4 cylinder, and that he was unable to check operation of the magnetos since they were saturated with water. An unspecified quantity of fuel was found in a fuel tank. Due to the extent of damage related to immersion in salt water, no further examination of the engine was possible.

The pilot had most recently purchased fuel from a fixed base operator at WST. The fuel facility there was inspected at the direction of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector following the accident. No abnormalities were noted during the inspection.

The accident airplane was manufactured in 1965 and was equipped with a Lycoming O-540-B4B5 engine. Review of maintenance records showed that the airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on August 7, 2011. At that time, the airframe had accumulated 4,720 total flight hours, and the engine had accumulated 2,147 hours since the most recent overhaul. The airplane had accumulated an additional 150 flight hours since that time.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate:
| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Certificate | Airline transport |
| Age | 41,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s) | Single-engine land; Single-engine sea; Multi-engine land; Multi-engine sea |
| Seat Occupied | Center |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s) | Glider; Helicopter |
| Restraint Used | - |
| Instrument Rating(s) | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present | No |
| Instructor Rating(s) | Airplane multi-engine; Airplane single-engine; Glider; Instrument airplane |
| Toxicology Performed | No |
| Medical Certification | Class 2 Without waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam | June 27, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot | Yes |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent | May 1, 2012 |
| Flight Time | 9175 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1500 hours (Total, this make and model), 8350 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 300 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 75 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with numerous ratings, including airplane single engine land. His most recent FAA second class medical certificate was issued in June 2012, and he reported that he possessed 9,175 total hours of flight experience, 1,500 hours of which were in the accident airplane make and model.

The weather reported at WST, at 1500, included winds from 210 degrees magnetic at 9 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, a broken ceiling at 1,600 feet, temperature 26 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 21 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.98 inches of mercury. The temperature and dew point conditions at that time were conducive to the formation of serious carburetor icing at glide power settings.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Piper
Registration: N7313Z

## Model/Series: PA-25-235
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 25-3245

## Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel
Seats: 1

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
August 1, 2011 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2900 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection: 150 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time: 4870 Hrs
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

## ELT: Not installed
Engine Model/Series: O-540-B4B5

## Registered Owner: SIMMONS MARK A DBA
Rated Power: 250 Horsepower

## Operator: SIMMONS AVIATION SERVICES
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation: WST,81 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 6 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time: 15:00 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 320°

## Lowest Cloud Condition: 1600 ft AGL
Visibility 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 1600 ft AGL
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts: 9 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:  / 

## Wind Direction: 210°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:  / 

## Altimeter Setting: 29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 26°C / 21°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point: Westerly, RI (WST )
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination: Westerly, RI (WST )
Type of Clearance: Unknown

## Departure Time: 14:45 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: | - |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 41.284168,-71.667221(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Diaz, Dennis

## Additional Participating Persons:
Craig Hiltz; FAA/FSDO; Boston, MA

## Original Publish Date:
July 29, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84428](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84428)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](here).