# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Litchfield, Illinois

## Date & Time: 
August 11, 2012, 11:50 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 177RG

## Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN12LA541

## Registration:
N1564H

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis
The pilot aborted the landing after the airplane veered off the runway and was headed toward airport lighting equipment. However, the airplane stalled during the initial climb and impacted a bean field. The pilot reported no preimpact mechanical malfunction or failure with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control during the landing and the subsequent aborted landing.

## Findings

| Element | Finding |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft | Directional control - Not attained/maintained |
| Aircraft | Airspeed - Not attained/maintained |
| Personnel issues | Aircraft control - Pilot |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Event | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Landing-aborted after touchdown | Loss of control on ground (Defining event) |
| Initial climb | Loss of control in flight |
| Uncontrolled descent | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On August 11, 2012, at 1150 central daylight time, a Cessna 177RG, N1564H, impacted terrain during initial climb from an aborted landing on runway 36 at Litchfield Municipal Airport (3LF), Litchfield, Illinois. The private pilot received minor injuries. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan had not been filed for the flight that departed from St. Louis Regional Airport, Alton, Illinois, about 1130 and was en route to 3LF.

The pilot stated that during landing, the airplane veered to the left and headed toward airport lighting equipment. The pilot performed an aborted landing, and during the initial climb, the airplane stalled and impacted trees. The airplane then landed on a bean field.

The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction/failure with the airplane at the time of the accident.

The pilot's recommendation of how the accident could have been prevented was, "Better control upon landing [and] recognition of crosswind conditions."

## Pilot Information

| Information | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Certificate | Private |
| Airplane Rating(s) | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s) | None |
| Instrument Rating(s) | None |
| Instructor Rating(s) | None |
| Medical Certification | Class 3 With waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot | No |
| Age | 56,Male |
| Seat Occupied | Left |
| Restraint Used | - |
| Second Pilot Present | No |
| Toxicology Performed | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam | August 26, 2010 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent | February 25, 2011 |
| Flight Time | 315 hours (Total, all aircraft), 118 hours (Total, this make and model), 207 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Cessna

## Registration: 
N1564H

## Model/Series:
177RG NO SERIES

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
177RG0738

## Landing Gear Type:
Retractable - Tricycle

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
March 10, 2012 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2800 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
5266 Hrs

## Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-A1B6D

## Registered Owner:
Pilot

## Rated Power:
200 Horsepower

## Operator:
Pilot

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
3LF,691 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
11:55 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 6000 ft AGL

## Visibility
10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
12 knots /

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Wind Direction:
320°

## Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 10°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Alton, IL (ALN )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Litchfield, IL (3LF )

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Departure Time:
11:30 Local

## Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Litchfield Municipal Airport 3LF |
| Airport Elevation: | 691 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 36 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 4002 ft / 75 ft |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Full stop;Traffic pattern |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 39.162498,-89.67472(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Gallo, Mitchell

## Additional Participating Persons:
Curt Lindauer; Federal Aviation Aviation; Springfield, IL

## Original Publish Date:
September 12, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84662](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84662)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).