# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Hernando Beach, Florida

## Date & Time: 
August 22, 2012, 11:40 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-28RT-201T

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ERA12LA522

## Registration:
N2970G

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis
While en route over the Gulf of Mexico, the pilot reported that the engine began to run rough and experienced a partial loss of power. The pilot declared an emergency, searched for a place to land, and performed a gear-up landing in the water. The pilot egressed and was rescued by the U.S. Coast Guard. A postaccident engine examination revealed that the No.6 cylinder fuel injection nozzle was blocked with debris. After the fuel nozzle was cleaned and reinstalled, an engine run was performed. The engine started and ran smoothly, accelerated to maximum power without hesitation, and was shut down with no anomalies noted. It is likely that a small particle of debris in the fuel became lodged in the No. 6 fuel injection nozzle, which resulted in the loss of engine power.

## Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power due to a blockage of the No. 6 cylinder fuel injector nozzle.

## Findings
| Aircraft | Fuel injector nozzle - Malfunction |
| --- | --- |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Off-field or emergency landing |
| Emergency descent | Ditching |

On August 22, 2012, about 1140 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28RT-201T, N2970G, was substantially damaged following a ditching into the Gulf of Mexico, near Hernando Beach, Florida. The private pilot was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The flight departed Knoxville Downtown Island Airport (DKX), Knoxville, Tennessee, about 0800 with the intended destination of St. Petersburg-Clearwater International Airport (PIE), St. Petersburg-Clearwater, Florida.

According to the pilot, he fueled the airplane prior to the accident flight. While en route, the pilot maneuvered the airplane around several thunderstorms before the engine began to run rough and experienced a partial loss of power over the Gulf of Mexico. The pilot declared an emergency, searched for a place to land, and located a few islands nearby. Unable to maintain altitude, the pilot performed a gear-up landing in the water, and the airplane came to rest in approximately 3 to 4 feet of water. The pilot egressed and was rescued by the U.S. Coast Guard around 1215.

The pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and instrument airplane. His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate was issued June 28, 2011. He reported 4,660 total hours of flight time, of which 3,085 were in the accident airplane make and model.

According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1979 and registered to the owner in 2006. It was equipped with a Continental Motors TSIO-360-FB1B, 200-horsepower engine. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on September 16, 2011. At the time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated 10,507 total hours of flight time.

The 1053 recorded weather observation at Hernando County Airport (BKV), Brooksville, Florida, located approximately 15 miles to the east of the accident location, included wind from 180 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 28 degrees C, dew point 24 degrees C; barometric altimeter 30.09 inches of mercury, and a remark of distant lightning to the north and northwest of the airport.

The airplane was recovered from the water two days after the accident and moved to a salvage facility, where an engine examination was conducted on September 7, 2012.

---

# Accident Report

## Engine Examination

The engine remained intact and exhibited signs of salt water immersion. The variable pitch propeller was still attached, and all three blades displayed minor bending. The spark plugs were removed prior to inspection of the engine. The spark plugs showed signs of salt water immersion and of normal wear. The internal magneto timing could not be verified due to salt water damage. A visual inspection of the fuel supply line fittings revealed significant amounts of rust.

The first attempt to start the engine resulted in intermittent firing. The spark plugs were removed and cleaned of salt water contamination. The engine was started a second time, which resulted in rough-running operation at a maximum power of 2,000 rpm with the fuel mixture set to full rich. A third engine run was performed, and the engine continued to run rough. Further examination revealed that the No.6 cylinder was cold. The No.6 cylinder spark plugs were removed, cleaned, and reinstalled. The No.6 fuel injection nozzle was removed and found to be clogged with debris. The nozzle was cleaned and reinstalled into the cylinder. The fourth and fifth engine runs resulted in smooth operation, and the engine reached a maximum of 2,600 rpm.

## Aircraft Instrumentation

The aircraft was equipped with a JBI Engine Analyzer unit. Readout of the unit at the NTSB Recorders Laboratory showed that for undetermined reasons the unit did not record the final stages of the accident flight.

# Pilot Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Certificate: | Private |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 Without waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Flight Time: | 4660 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3085 hours (Total, this make and model), 4433 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

| | |
|-|-|
| Age: | 50,Male |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | June 28, 2011 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | August 21, 2012 |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Piper
Registration: N2970G

Model/Series: PA-28RT-201T
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 
Amateur Built:

Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 28R-7931283

Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 4

Date/Type of Last Inspection:
September 16, 2011 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2900 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

Airframe Total Time: 10507 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: CONT MOTOR

ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: TSIO-360 SER

Registered Owner: TURBO ARROW AVIATION LLC
Rated Power: 225 Horsepower

Operator: TURBO ARROW AVIATION LLC
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility, Elevation: BKV,76 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 15 Nautical Miles

Observation Time: 10:53 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 90°

Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility: 10 miles

Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):

Wind Speed/Gusts: 7 knots / 
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:

Wind Direction: 180°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:

Altimeter Setting: 30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 28°C / 24°C

Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation

Departure Point: Knoxville, TN (DKX )
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

Destination: St. Petersburg, FL (PIE )
Type of Clearance: VFR flight following

Departure Time: 07:55 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | Aircraft Fire: None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 28.426389,-82.693054(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Diaz, Allison

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Frank Crawford; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL
* Jason Lukasik; Continental Motors, Inc.; Mobile, AL

## Original Publish Date:
August 13, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84760](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84760)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](here).