# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Rolla, North Dakota

## Date & Time: 
August 28, 2012, 19:00 Local

## Aircraft:
AVIAT INC A-1

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN12LA587

## Registration:
N49363

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

The pilot stated that he self-fueled the airplane with 40 gallons of fuel before the cross-country flight. About 10 miles from his destination airport, the engine stopped producing power. The pilot made a forced landing to a field and flipped over. A postaccident examination of the airplane revealed the right wing's fuel cap was missing and could not be located. The top of the wing area around the fuel cap and back toward the trailing edge was stained blue, which was consistent with fuel venting overboard. Examination of the left wing fuel tank revealed it was empty of fuel and less than 1 cup of fuel was drained from the right wing fuel tank. No mechanical malfunctions or anomalies were noted with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to secure the right wing's fuel cap before the flight and to properly manage the available fuel supply during the flight, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.

## Findings

| | |
|-|-|
| Aircraft | Fuel - Fluid management |
| Personnel issues | Decision making/judgment - Pilot |

---

# Annual Report

## Financial Highlights

* Revenue: $40M
* Profit: $12M
* EPS: $1.25

| | Year Ended December 31, | |
| | 2021 | 2022 |
|-|-|-|
| Cash provided by (used in): | | |
| Operating activities | $ 46,327 | $ 46,752 |
| Investing activities | (58,154) | (37,601) |
| Financing activities | 6,291 | 9,718 |

Page 2 of 6 CEN12LA587

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Loss of engine power (total) |
| Landing-landing roll | Loss of control on ground |

On August 28, 2012, about 1850 central daylight time, N49363, an Aviat Inc A-1 Husky, sustained substantial damage when it nosed over during a forced landing to a field after a total loss of engine power near Rolla, North Dakota. The certificated commercial pilot and the passenger were not injured. No flight plan was filed for the cross country flight that departed Huron Regional Airport (HON) Huron, South Dakota, at 1430, and was destined for Rolla Municipal Airport (06D), Rolla, North Dakota. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.

The pilot stated that he self-fueled the airplane before he departed with 40 gallons of fuel. The flight was uneventful until they were 10 miles south of the Rolla airport. The pilot said,"...the engine cut out, sputtered and quit and would not restart." He immediately turned into the wind and landed in a harvested wheat field. Upon touch down, he applied brakes to avoid a large pot hole. The airplane tipped up on its nose and slowly fell on to its back, which resulted in structural damage to the wing struts.

An airframe and power plant mechanic recovered the airplane from the field. In a written statement, he said that the right wing's fuel cap was missing and could not be located. The top of the wing area around the fuel filler cap was stained blue back toward the trailing edge consistent with fuel venting overboard. The mechanic also said that when he removed both wings, there was no fuel in the left wing and less than a cup of fuel in the right wing. No other mechanical anomalies were noted with the airplane or engine.

---

# Pilot Information

| Certificate: | Commercial |
| --- | --- |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: |  |
| Occupational Pilot: | UNK |
| Flight Time: | 3680 hours (Total, all aircraft) |

| Age: | 37,Male |
| --- | --- |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: |  |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: |  |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | April 21, 2011 |

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | AVIAT INC |
| --- | --- |
| Model/Series: | A-1 |
| Year of Manufacture: |  |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Normal |
| Landing Gear Type: |  |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | January 2, 2012 Annual |
| Time Since Last Inspection: |  |
| Airframe Total Time: | 1432.4 Hrs as of last inspection |
| ELT: | Installed, not activated |
| Registered Owner: | AIRPLANE INC |
| Operator: | AIRPLANE INC |

| Registration: | N49363 |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Amateur Built: |  |
| Serial Number: | 1234 |
| Seats: | 2 |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: |  |
| Engines: | 1 Reciprocating |
| Engine Manufacturer: | LYCOMING |
| Engine Model/Series: | O&VO-360 SER |
| Rated Power: | 180 Horsepower |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | None |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
- Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- DVL,1823 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site: 
- 55 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 16:35 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
- 144°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Clear

## Visibility:
- 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- 7 knots /
- Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
  /

## Wind Direction:
- 140°
- Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
  /

## Altimeter Setting:
- 29.94 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
- 29°C / 16°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:

## Departure Point:
- Huron, SD (HON )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
- None

## Destination:
- Rolla, ND

## Type of Clearance:
- None

## Departure Time:
- 14:30 Local

## Type of Airspace:

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
- 1 None

## Aircraft Damage:
- Substantial

## Passenger Injuries:
- 1 None

## Aircraft Fire:
- None

## Ground Injuries:
- N/A

## Aircraft Explosion:
- None

## Total Injuries:
- 2 None

## Latitude, Longitude:
- 48.883888,-99.618888(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Yeager, Leah

## Additional Participating Persons:
Brent Allen; FAA/FSDO; FARGO, ND

## Original Publish Date:
September 12, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84853](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84853)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](here).