# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Rockford, Illinois

## Date & Time: 
August 17, 2012, 16:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 152

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Instructional

## Accident Number:
CEN12CA599

## Registration:
N152BA

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

While on a visual approach to the runway during the instructional flight, the engine lost partial power. The flight instructor reported that the engine was operating normally and then the engine rpm abruptly decreased from 2,200 to about 1,300. The carburetor heat was in the OFF position for the approach. The flight instructor's efforts to regain engine power were unsuccessful. Unable to make a landing at the airport, the instructor executed a forced landing to a field. The airplane touched down short of the airport, nosed over, and came to rest inverted. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the vertical stabilizer and rudder were bent; no mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation were identified. The engine was test run at various power settings with no anomalies noted. Although a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that the ambient temperature and dew point at the time of the accident favored serious carburetor icing at glide power, the pilot reported that the engine was not at glide power when the power loss occurred. Accordingly, the investigation was not able to identify the reason for the power loss.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination of the engine revealed no anomalies.

---

# Findings

## Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment

## Personnel issues
Lack of action - Pilot

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight
| Approach-VFR pattern final | Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Off-field or emergency landing |
| Landing-flare/touchdown | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

## Flight instructor Information
| Certificate: | Commercial; Flight instructor |
| Age: | 25,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land; Multi-engine land |
| Seat Occupied: | Right |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | Airplane single-engine; Instrument airplane |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 1 Without waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | November 1, 2011 |
| Occupational Pilot: | Yes |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | April 26, 2012 |
| Flight Time: | 1322 hours (Total, all aircraft), 578 hours (Total, this make and model), 1262 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 227 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 59 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

## Student pilot Information
| Certificate: | Student |
| Age: | 20,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | None |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 1 Without waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | February 28, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |
| Flight Time: | 27 hours (Total, all aircraft), 26 hours (Total, this make and model), 18 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Cessna

## Registration: 
N152BA

## Model/Series:
152

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
15282722

## Landing Gear Type:
Tricycle

## Seats:
2

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
July 2, 2012 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
9708 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
O-235 SERIES

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
110 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
RFD,742 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
15:54 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
210°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 25000 ft AGL

## Visibility
10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
6 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 8°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Poplar Grove, IL (C77 )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Rockford, IL (RFD )

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Departure Time:
16:00 Local

## Type of Airspace:

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 2 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | Aircraft Fire: None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 42.195278,-89.097221(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Sauer, Aaron

## Additional Participating Persons:
Edward Dabrowski; Federal Aviation Administration; West Chicago, IL

## Original Publish Date:
November 26, 2012

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84916](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84916)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=84916).