# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Homer, Alaska

## Date & Time: 
September 7, 2012, 17:00 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-18-150

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ANC12LA103

## Registration:
N3214D

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

The private pilot was attempting to land at an off-airport site in a coastal fjord. During the approach, he noticed that the propeller didn't seem to be spinning at the correct rpm. He applied carburetor heat and increased the throttle, but the engine did not respond. The airplane was unable to reach the intended landing area and impacted the water about 20 yards from shore.

The pilot attempted to secure the airplane to the shore, but tides and water flow swept the airplane into open water. The airplane was later recovered by a fishing vessel, but, due to the length of time spent in salt water, the engine was not able to be examined.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because the engine could not be examined because of the extent of time in salt water.

## Findings
Not determined (general) - Unknown/Not determined

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Approach | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Ditching |

On September 7, 2012, about 1700 Alaska daylight time, a Piper PA-18-150 airplane, N3214D, presumably sustained substantial damage during a forced ditching, following a loss of engine power near Homer, Alaska. The certificated private pilot was not injured. The flight was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 when the accident occurred. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated at the Homer Airport, about 1600.

In a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot stated that he was attempting to land at an off-airport site in a coastal fjord approximately 35 nautical miles east of Homer. During the approach, at approximately 400 feet above ground level, he noticed that "the propeller looked like it was not spinning at the right RPM." He applied carburetor heat, and increased the throttle control, but the engine did not respond. From that point, he was unable to reach the intended landing site, and the airplane impacted water about 20 yards from shore.

The pilot was able to exit the airplane, and he activated his 121.5 MHz Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT), but he was not located until September 10, when he was spotted by an overflying airplane. As of February 1, 2009, monitoring of 121.5 MHz ELT analog transmissions by all search and rescue satellites was terminated. On that date, only digital, 406 MHz ELT transmissions could be received by the satellites.

The pilot reported that he attempted to secure the airplane to the shore, but tides and water flow swept the airplane into the fjord toward open water.

The airplane was later recovered by a fishing vessel, but due to the length of time spent in salt water, the engine was not able to be examined.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Private

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Single-engine sea

## Seat Occupied:
Front

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
April 28, 2011

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
May 1, 2012

## Flight Time:
6200 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4200 hours (Total, this make and model)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Piper

## Registration:
N3214D

## Model/Series:
PA-18-150

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
18-8209025

## Landing Gear Type:
Tailwheel

## Seats:
2

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
March 15, 2012 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:

## Time Since Last Inspection:
40 Hrs

## Engines:
1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
2500 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING

## ELT:
C91A installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
O-320 SERIES

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
180 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

| Conditions at Accident Site: | Visual (VMC) |
| --- | --- |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | PAHO |
| Observation Time: | 16:53 Local |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Few / 5000 ft AGL |
| Lowest Ceiling: | Broken / 11000 ft AGL |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 4 knots / |
| Wind Direction: | 170° |
| Altimeter Setting: | 29.94 inches Hg |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Homer, AK |
| Destination: | Homer, AK |
| Departure Time: | 16:00 Local |

| Condition of Light: | Day |
| --- | --- |
| Distance from Accident Site: | 35 Nautical Miles |
| Direction from Accident Site: | 275° |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 12°C / 2°C |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Type of Clearance: | None |
| Type of Airspace: |  |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| --- | --- |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: |  |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 59.562221,-150.353332(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shaver, Christopher

## Additional Participating Persons:
Larry Peterson; FAA Anchorage FSDO; Anchorage, AK

## Original Publish Date:
February 27, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85005](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85005)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).