# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Geary, Oklahoma

## Date & Time: 
September 9, 2012, 13:15 Local

## Aircraft:
Beech 35

## Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Instructional

## Accident Number:
CEN12CA625

## Registration:
N3014V

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

After an uneventful local instructional flight, the student pilot and instructor pilot were practicing emergency landing procedures. After a missed approach to the private ranch airport, the student attempted a go-around. During the go-around, there was a loss of engine power during the climb and the student pilot tried to set up for an actual emergency landing. While maneuvering the airplane to land, both the instructor pilot and student attempted to trouble shoot and regain engine power by switching fuel tanks attempting a restart. About 20 feet above the runway, the airplane stalled, impacted the runway, and came to a stop in a grassy area to the left of the runway. Both wings sustained substantial damage. After the accident, the student pilot, who owned the airplane, stated that he may have moved the fuel selector lever to the left tank position while he and the instructor were trying to trouble shoot the loss of engine power. The instructor pilot occupied the right seat and would not have been able to see the fuel selector lever position. Postaccident examination of the airplane and engine revealed that both the right main fuel tank and auxiliary fuel tank had usable fuel. The left main fuel tank was empty and was not compromised. The fuel selector lever was found in the left tank position. No evidence of mechanical malfunction or any other preimpact abnormalities were found. Although the loss of engine power could be linked to possible fuel starvation, the cause for the loss of engine power could not be substantiated.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:The student pilot failed to maintain control of the airplane during a forced landing attempt which resulted in an aerodynamic stall. Contributing to the accident was the instructor pilot's delay in taking control of the airplane and the loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.

---

# Findings

## Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Student/instructed pilot

## Aircraft
(general) - Not specified

## Personnel issues
Delayed action - Instructor/check pilot

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight
Approach-VFR go-around | Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)

## Flight instructor Information
| | |
|-|-|
| Certificate: | Commercial; Flight instructor; Private |
| Age: | 58,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land; Multi-engine land |
| Seat Occupied: | Right |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | Airplane multi-engine; Airplane single-engine; Instrument airplane |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | February 1, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |
| Flight Time: | (Estimated) 1929 hours (Total, all aircraft), 11 hours (Total, this make and model), 1791 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

## Student pilot Information
| | |
|-|-|
| Certificate: | None |
| Age: | 24,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | None |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | None None |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: |  |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |
| Flight Time: | 2 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Beech
Registration: N3014V

## Model/Series: 35
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: D-416

## Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2350 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection: 
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

Airframe Total Time:
Engine Manufacturer: CONT MOTOR

## ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: E185 SERIES

## Registered Owner: Rowdy W Haynes
Rated Power: 205 Horsepower

## Operator: 
Rowdy W Haynes
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site: 
Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
CLK,1616 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 25 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
14:30 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 270°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear
Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
16 knots / 20 knots
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / 

## Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / 

## Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 38°C / 5°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:

## Departure Point:
Weatherford, OK (OJA )
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination:
Weatherford, OK (OJA )
Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
13:00 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | McKinley Ranch Airport 0OK3 |
| Airport Elevation: | 1420 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 34 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 5000 ft / 50 ft |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt;Gravel |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 2 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 None |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 35.619445,-98.522499(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lemishko, Alexander

## Additional Participating Persons:
Dan J Donnelly; FAA FSDO Oklahoma City; Oklahoma City, OK

## Original Publish Date:
July 29, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85013](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85013)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85013).