# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Shelbyville, Illinois

## Date & Time: 
September 13, 2012, 10:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Bruce M Barrett STOLP STARLET SA500

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN12LA632

## Registration:
N935B

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis
The pilot reported that about 1 hour after takeoff, while established in cruise flight at 3,000 feet mean sea level, the engine lost power completely and without warning. His efforts to restore engine power were not successful. He executed a forced landing to a bean field and the airplane nosed over during the landing roll. A postaccident examination of the engine revealed no evidence of an engine malfunction or failure. Surface weather conditions in the vicinity of the accident site indicated the potential for serious carburetor icing at glide power and moderate icing at cruise power. The exact weather conditions at cruise altitude were not known. Further, an abrupt loss of engine power is not consistent with carburetor icing. Accordingly, a determination of the underlying cause of the loss of engine power could not be determined.

## Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An abrupt, complete loss of engine power during cruise flight for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.

---

# Findings

| | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |
| --- | --- |
| Not determined | |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
|-|-|
| Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Off-field or emergency landing |
| Landing | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On September 13, 2012, about 1030 central daylight time, an amateur-built Barrett Stolp Starlet SA500, N935B, was substantially damaged during a forced landing to a bean field following a loss of engine power near Shelbyville, Illinois. The pilot was not injured. The aircraft was registered to a private individual and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operated on a flight plan. The flight originated from Owensboro-Daviess County Airport (OWB), Owensboro, Kentucky, at 0932. The intended destination was Ingersoll Airport (CTK), Canton, Illinois.

The pilot reported that about one hour after takeoff, while established in cruise flight at 3,000 feet mean sea level, the engine lost power completely and without warning. His efforts to restore engine power were not successful. He executed a forced landing to a bean field and the airplane nosed over during the landing roll.

A postaccident examination did not reveal any anomalies consistent with an abrupt loss of engine power. Internal engine continuity was confirmed via crankshaft rotation. Compression was observed on all cylinders. Proper magneto operation was confirmed. The induction air filter was partially obstructed; however, air movement was detected through the filter when pressurized air was applied to the inlet side of the filter. The carburetor fuel screen appeared unobstructed and a fuel sample obtained at the carburetor was free of sediment. The fuel selector did not have a positive engagement at any of the settings; otherwise, it functioned normally.

Surface weather conditions reported at the Taylorville Municipal Airport (TAZ), located about 23 miles west of the accident site, at 1035, included a temperature and dew point of 26 degrees Celsius and 16 degrees Celsius, respectively. This indicated a possibility of serious carburetor icing at glide power and moderate icing at cruise power. However, the exact temperature and dew point at the airplane cruise altitude were not known.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Airline transport; Flight engineer

## Airplane Rating(s):
* Single-engine land
* Single-engine sea 
* Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Single

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane single-engine

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 1 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
April 20, 2012

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
July 16, 2012

## Flight Time:
* 15448 hours (Total, all aircraft)
* 7 hours (Total, this make and model)
* 8032 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft) 
* 215 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
* 56 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
* 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Bruce M Barrett

## Registration:
N935B

## Model/Series:
STOLP STARLET SA500

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built: Yes

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental (Special)

## Serial Number:
06118

## Landing Gear Type:
Tailwheel

## Seats:
1

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
January 2, 2012 Condition

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1000 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
O-235-C1A

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
100 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
* Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
* Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
* TAZ,622 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
* 23 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
* 10:35 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
* 270°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
* Clear

## Visibility:
* 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
* None

## Visibility (RVR):
* 

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
* 4 knots /

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
* /

## Wind Direction:
* 180°

## Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
* /

## Altimeter Setting:
* 30.21 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
* 26°C / 16°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
* No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
* Owensboro, KY (OWB )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
* None

## Destination:
* Canton, IL (CTK )

## Type of Clearance:
* None

## Departure Time:
* 09:32 Local

## Type of Airspace:
*

# Airport Information

## Airport:
* Shelby County 2H0

## Airport Elevation:
* 619 ft msl

## Runway Used:
* IFR Approach: None

## Runway Length/Width:
* VFR Approach/Landing: Forced landing

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
* 1 None

## Aircraft Damage:
* Substantial

## Passenger Injuries:
* Aircraft Fire: None

## Ground Injuries:
* N/A

## Aircraft Explosion:
* None

## Total Injuries:
* 1 None

## Latitude, Longitude:
* 39.410556,-88.845558(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Sorensen, Timothy

## Additional Participating Persons:
Stephanie Williams; FAA -- Springfield Flight Standards; Springfield, IL

## Original Publish Date:
December 11, 2012

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85034](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85034)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.