# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Decorah, Iowa

## Date & Time: 
September 30, 2012, 09:20 Local

## Aircraft:
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS HELI CO 369FF

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Positioning

## Accident Number:
CEN12LA667

## Registration:
N530KD

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

The pilot and his passenger were repositioning the helicopter and stopped twice to refuel. Each time they stopped the pilot topped off the fuel tank. During the second stop, the pilot used the airplane for personal reasons and flew for just over an hour. Before continuing on with the repositioning flight, the pilot added 15 gallons of fuel. Since this was not enough fuel to top off the tank, he referenced the fuel guage, which indicated 305-310 pounds of fuel on board. The pilot and passenger then departed on the next leg of their flight. About 58 minutes after they departed, the fuel-low caution light illuminated, indicating there was 35 pounds of fuel remaining. The pilot continued with the flight since he was within a few miles of the destination airport. About three minutes after the fuel-low caution light illuminated, the engine quit. The pilot made an autorotation to a mature corn field. The helicopter bounced upon touch down and rolled over on to its left side, which damaged the tail boom. Examination of the helicopter revealed only two drops of fuel were drained from the fuel sump and a 1/4-cup of fuel was drained from the fuel tank. Further examination revealed no mechancal deficiencies with the fuel system; however, when the fuel gauge and low-fuel caution light were tested they were found to not be calibrated correctly. The fuel gauge indicated a higher fuel total then what was actually in the fuel tank and the fuel-low caution light came on when there was only 19 pounds of fuel in the fuel tank versus 35 pounds. According to the operator, the low fuel-low caution light was inspected several months before the accident as part of a normal maintenance inspection. From the time this inspection was completed to the time of the accident, no other maintenance was performed on the fuel quantity sensor system.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

---

# Findings

## Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot

## Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management

## Aircraft
Fuel quantity indicator - Incorrect service/maintenance

## Aircraft
Fuel quantity sensor - Incorrect service/maintenance

The pilot's failure to manage the helicopter's available fuel supply, which led to a total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion. Contributing to the accident was the improper calibration of the fuel gauge and fuel-low warning light.

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
|-|-|
| Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Autorotation | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On September 30, 2012, at 0920 central daylight time, a McDonnell Douglas 369FF helicopter, N530KD, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing to a corn field near Decorah, Iowa. The airline transport rated pilot and the passenger sustained minor injuries. The helicopter was registered to and operated by Rogers Helicopters Incorporated, Fresno, California. A company visual flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight that departed Fort Dodge Regional Airport (FOD), Fort Dodge, Iowa, about 0820, and was destined for Decorah Municipal Airport (DEH), Decorah, Iowa. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the repositioning flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.

The pilot reported that he picked up the helicopter and his passenger (an employee of the operator) on September 29, 2013, in Kearney, Nebraska, and planned to fly it to Green Bay, Wisconsin, for a power line construction job scheduled to begin on October 1, 2012. They departed Kearney, with full fuel (64 gallons/428 pounds total) and flew to Columbus, Nebraska (a 50-minute flight), where he topped off the fuel tank by adding 32 gallons of fuel. They then departed Columbus for Fort Dodge, Iowa (a 1:20 flight). In Fort Dodge, the passenger topped off the fuel tank with 48.95 gallons of fuel. That night, while the passenger stayed at a hotel, the pilot flew the helicopter to his ranch near Jefferson, Iowa, a total of 48 minutes. (The pilot said it was a 14 minute flight to his ranch and then he flew an additional 34 minutes before he landed and spent the night). The following morning, the day of the accident, the pilot flew back to Fort Dodge (a 14 minute flight) and picked up the passenger. The pilot added only 15 gallons of fuel in Fort Dodge. Since the pilot was unable to visually check the fuel quantity due to the design of the fuel system (a pilot can only verify a full tank if the tank is topped off), he referenced the fuel gauge, which indicated a total of 305-310 pounds of fuel.

The pilot and the passenger then departed for Decorah, Iowa. The pilot said the low fuel caution light illuminated about 58 minutes into the flight, which should have indicated there was at least 35 pounds of fuel remaining. The pilot elected to continue toward the airport since it was about 3 miles away. He said that about three minutes after the fuel-low warning light came on, the engine flamed out and he made an autorotation to a mature corn field. The helicopter bounced upon touch down and rolled over coming to rest on its left side.

Examination of the helicopter by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed the tail boom had separated and the main rotor and tail rotor blades were damaged. The fuel tank was not damaged and there was no smell of fuel. Approximately two drops of fuel were drained from the fuel sump and about a quarter-cup of fuel from the fuel tank.

---

# At the request of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Investigator-in-Charge (IIC), the company that repaired the helicopter performed a more detailed examination of the fuel system and found no mechanical deficiencies that would have precluded normal operation of the fuel system and engine. However, the fuel gauge and fuel-low caution light were not calibrated correctly. When 19 pounds of fuel were placed in the fuel tank, the fuel gauge indicated 2 bar widths above the red dot on the guage (red dot is the 35 pounds of fuel mark); and, when 35 pounds of fuel were placed in the tank, the gauge indicated between the red dot and 100 pounds. The fuel-low caution light, which should come on when 35 pounds of fuel are remaining in the tank, came on at 19 pounds.

According to the operator, the fuel-low caution light was inspected as part of a continuous airworthiness inspection on March 1, 2012. From the time this inspection was completed to the time of the accident, no other maintenance was performed on the fuel quantity sensor system.

## Pilot Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Certificate: | Airline transport |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | Helicopter |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane; Helicopter |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | Yes |
| Flight Time: | 7429 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3866 hours (Total, this make and model), 7404 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 86 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

| | |
|-|-|
| Age: | 46,Male |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | August 3, 2012 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | MCDONNELL DOUGLAS HELI CO |
| --- | --- |
| Registration: | N530KD |
| Model/Series: | 369FF | Aircraft Category: | Helicopter |
| Year of Manufacture: |  | Amateur Built: |  |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Normal | Serial Number: | 0044FF |
| Landing Gear Type: | Skid | Seats: | 4 |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | September 6, 2012 100 hour | Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 3100 lbs |
| Time Since Last Inspection: | Engines: | 1 Turbo shaft |
| Airframe Total Time: | 4641 Hrs as of last inspection | Engine Manufacturer: | Rolls Royce |
| ELT: | Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident | Engine Model/Series: | A250-C30 |
| Registered Owner: | Robin M Rogers | Rated Power: | 650 Horsepower |
| Operator: | Rogers Helicopters | Operating Certificate(s) Held: | On-demand air taxi (135) |

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

| Conditions at Accident Site: | Visual (VMC) | Condition of Light: | Day |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | DEH | Distance from Accident Site: | 3 Nautical Miles |
| Observation Time: | 09:15 Local | Direction from Accident Site: | 248° |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Clear | Visibility | 10 miles |
| Lowest Ceiling: | None | Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 5 knots /  | Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  /  |
| Wind Direction: | 120° | Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  /  |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30 inches Hg | Temperature/Dew Point: | 12°C / 6°C |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: |  |  |  |
| Departure Point: | Fort Dodge, IA (FOD ) | Type of Flight Plan Filed: | Company VFR |
| Destination: | Decorah, IA (DEH ) | Type of Clearance: | None |
| Departure Time: | 08:20 Local | Type of Airspace: | Class G |

Page 5 of 7 CEN12LA667

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | 1 None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 43.271945,-91.736946(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Yeager, Leah

## Additional Participating Persons:
Rachel Keating; FAA/FSDO; Des Moines, IA

## Original Publish Date:
January 13, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85184](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85184)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).