# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Palm Coast, Florida

## Date & Time: 
October 11, 2012, 13:30 Local

## Aircraft:
DIAMOND AIRCRAFT IND GMBH DA 42 NG

## Defining Event:
Hard landing

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Instructional

## Accident Number:
ERA13LA043

## Registration:
N607PA

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

During the approach, the designated pilot examiner (DPE) instructed the pilot to demonstrate a short-field landing. While on short final approach, the pilot reduced power and slowed the airspeed. As the airplane crossed the runway threshold, it descended rapidly and then landed hard. Neither pilot reported any flight control anomalies or mechanical malfunctions that would have precluded normal operation. A review of the flight school's training manual revealed that the pilot was to obtain 82 knots indicated airspeed (KIAS) during a short-field landing. Review of the manufacturer's operating procedures revealed that the minimum airspeed for landing was between 84 and 86 KIAS and that it contained no procedures for short-field landings. The DPE stated that the airspeed was between about 75 and 80 KIAS during the approach and 67 KIAS before touchdown, which was lower than the landing airspeed listed in the manufacturer's operating manual or the flight school's training manual. The DPE stated that the speed "bled off" to fast for her to take over control of the airplane. Conducting the landing at such a low airspeed resulted in the loss of lift and a hard landing.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in a hard landing.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
Landing flare - Incorrect use/operation

## Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Landing-flare/touchdown | Hard landing (Defining event) |

On October 11, 2012, about 1330 eastern daylight time, a Diamond DA-42 Twinstar, N607PA, was substantially damaged following a hard landing at Flagler County Airport (XFL), Palm Coast, Florida. The designated pilot examiner (DPE) and private pilot were uninjured. The airplane was registered to and operated by Phoenix East Aviation under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The flight departed from Daytona Beach International Airport (DAB), Daytona Beach, Florida at 1000.

According to the DPE and the pilot, the purpose of the flight was to complete a multi-engine check ride. During an approach, the pilot was instructed to demonstrate a short field landing. While on short final, the pilot reduced power and slowed the airspeed. As the airplane crossed the runway threshold, the airplane descended rapidly and landed hard on the runway. Both pilots reported no flight control anomalies or mechanical malfunctions that would have precluded normal operation. A post-accident examination by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the composite wing spar fractured at the fuselage bulkhead.

A review of the Phoenix East Aviation's training manual revealed that the procedures for short-field approach to landing required the pilot to obtain 82 knots indicated airspeed (KIAS). A review of the Diamond Aircraft normal operating procedures revealed that the minimum airspeed with flaps applied for landing is 84 KIAS. There is not a published short field landing procedure in the Diamond Aircraft DA-42 operations manual. During the approach to land the DPE stated that the airspeed was approximately between 75-80 KIAS and indicated 67 knots before touchdown.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate:
Private

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
August 1, 2012

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
October 5, 2012

## Flight Time:
* 460 hours (Total, all aircraft)
* 43 hours (Total, this make and model)
* 335 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
* 60 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
* 30 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Check pilot Information

## Certificate:
Airline transport; Flight instructor

## Age:
79

## Airplane Rating(s):
* Single-engine land
* Single-engine sea
* Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Right

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
Glider

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
* Airplane multi-engine
* Airplane single-engine
* Glider
* Instrument airplane

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 2 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
July 3, 2012

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
March 1, 2011

## Flight Time:
* (Estimated) 15000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
* 400 hours (Total, this make and model)
* 14000 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
DIAMOND AIRCRAFT IND GMBH

## Registration:
N607PA

## Model/Series:
DA 42 NG

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
2007

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
42.AC078

## Landing Gear Type:
Retractable - Tricycle

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
September 14, 2012 100 hour

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4189 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
67 Hrs

## Engines:
2 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
2180 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
Austro

## ELT:
C91 installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident

## Engine Model/Series:
E4-B

## Registered Owner:
PHOENIX EAST AVIATION INC

## Rated Power:
132 Horsepower

## Operator:
PHOENIX EAST AVIATION INC

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
XFL,33 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
13:50 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
0°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3400 ft AGL

## Visibility
10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
12 knots /

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / None

## Wind Direction:
40°

## Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A

## Altimeter Setting:
30.18 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 17°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Daytona Beach, FL (DAB )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Palm Coast, FL (XFL )

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Departure Time:
10:00 Local

## Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Flagler County Airport XFL |
| Airport Elevation: | 33 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 06 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 5000 ft / 100 ft |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Stop and go;Traffic pattern |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 2 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 29.466943,-81.203613(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alleyne, Eric

## Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Jex; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL

## Original Publish Date:
June 11, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85465](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85465)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](here).