# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Halfway, Missouri

## Date & Time: 
December 5, 2012, 13:00 Local

## Aircraft:
Stinson 108-2

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN13LA091

## Registration:
N8775K

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 Minor

## Analysis

The private pilot said the airplane was in cruise flight when the engine made an unusual grinding noise and then stopped producing power. The pilot made a forced landing to a field. During the emergency descent, the airplane struck a power line with the left main landing gear and landed hard. Examination of the engine revealed that the magnetos were not properly secured to the engine and that the camshaft was broken. A review of the engine maintenance logbook revealed the airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed in January 2008, almost 5 years before the accident.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's failure to properly maintain the airplane and engine, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to improperly installed magnetos and a broken camshaft.

## Findings

| Aircraft | (general) - Failure |
| --- | --- |
| Personnel issues | Scheduled/routine maintenance - Pilot |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Enroute | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |

On December 5, 2012, at 1300 central standard time, a Stinson 108, N8775K, was substantially damaged during a forced landing to a field following a loss of engine power near Halfway, Missouri. The private pilot sustained minor injuries. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. No flight plan was filed for the flight that departed Eads Ridge Airport (MO68), Fair Grove, Missouri, at 1240.

A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector interviewed the pilot and examined the airplane. According to the inspector, the pilot had been airborne for approximately 20 minutes when the engine began to make an unusual grinding noise followed by a loss of engine power. The pilot attempted to make a forced landing to a field and struck a powerline with the left main landing gear. The airplane landed hard, resulting in substantial damage to both wings, the fuselage and an engine mount. The left main landing gear and propeller were also damaged. Examination of the engine revealed the magnetos were not properly secured to the engine and were loose. When the magnetos were removed, the inspector could visually see that the camshaft was broken.

A review of the engine maintenance logbooks revealed the airplane's last annual inspection was January 8, 2008.

The pilot held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land. His last FAA third class medical was issued on March 4, 2009, and his last biennial flight review was on August 31, 2008. The pilot reported a total of 761 hours; of which 437 hours were in the accident airplane. He stated that he had flown the airplane approximately 3 hours in the last 90 days and was trying to prepare for a biennial flight review when the accident occurred.

---

# Pilot Information

| Certificate: | Private |
| --- | --- |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 With waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | UNK |
| Flight Time: | 761 hours (Total, all aircraft), 437 hours (Total, this make and model), 3 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft) |

| Age: | 58,Male |
| Seat Occupied: | Front |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | March 4, 2009 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | August 31, 2008 |

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | Stinson |
| --- | --- |
| Model/Series: | 108-2 |
| Year of Manufacture: |  |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Normal |
| Landing Gear Type: | Tailwheel |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | January 8, 2008 Annual |
| Time Since Last Inspection: |  |
| Airframe Total Time: | 1271 Hrs at time of accident |
| ELT: | Not installed |
| Registered Owner: | HUFF MIKE W |
| Operator: | HUFF MIKE W |

| Registration: | N8775K |
| Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Amateur Built: |  |
| Serial Number: | 108-2357 |
| Seats: | 4 |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 2400 lbs |
| Engines: | 1 Reciprocating |
| Engine Manufacturer: | FRANKLIN |
| Engine Model/Series: | 6A4165 SERIES |
| Rated Power: | 165 Horsepower |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | None |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

| Conditions at Accident Site: | Visual (VMC) |
| --- | --- |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | None |
| Observation Time: |  |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Clear |
| Lowest Ceiling: |  |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | / |
| Wind Direction: | 3° |
| Altimeter Setting: | |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: |  |
| Departure Point: | Fair Grove, MO (MO68) |
| Destination: | Bolivar, MO (M17 ) |
| Departure Time: | 12:40 Local |

| Condition of Light: | Day |
| Distance from Accident Site: |  |
| Direction from Accident Site: |  |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: | / |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: | / |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 18°C |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | Unknown |
| Type of Clearance: | Unknown |
| Type of Airspace: |  |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Crew Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 Minor |

| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 37.616664,-93.239997(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Yeager, Leah

## Additional Participating Persons:
Rod McLaughlin; FAA/FSDO; Kansas City, MO

## Original Publish Date:
January 30, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85755](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85755)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).