# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Chandler, Arizona

## Date & Time: 
December 31, 2012, 11:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 210A

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR13LA078

## Registration:
N9507X

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
4 None

## Analysis

The pilot reported that he performed three successful touch-and-go landings. During the fourth takeoff, the engine lost power. The pilot made a forced landing in an open field, and the airplane came to rest about 1/4 mile from the departure end of the runway.

A postaccident examination of the engine revealed no mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. During a postaccident engine test run, the engine started and then ran for several minutes at various power settings with no anomalies noted. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A loss of engine power during takeoff climb for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination and testing of the engine revealed no mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.

## Findings

Not determined (general) - Unknown/Not determined

---

# Annual Report

## Financial Highlights

* Revenue: $40M
* Profit: $12M
* EPS: $1.25

| | Year Ended December 31, | |
| | 2021 | 2022 |
|-|-|-|
| Cash provided by (used in): | | |
| Operating activities | $ 46,327 | $ 46,752 |
| Investing activities | (58,154) | (37,601) |
| Financing activities | 6,291 | 9,718 |

Page 2 of 7 WPR13LA078

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
|-|-|
| Takeoff | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On December 31, 2012, about 1130 mountain standard time, a Cessna 210A, N9507X, experienced a loss of engine power on takeoff from runway 22R, and the pilot made a forced landing in an open field near the Chandler Municipal Airport (CHD), Chandler, Arizona. The pilot operated the privately-owned borrowed airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The private pilot and three passengers were not injured. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and wings. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight, and no flight plan had been filed.

The pilot reported that before takeoff, he had completed a full engine run up in accordance with the aircraft handbook, with no anomalies encountered. He performed three touch-and-go takeoff and landings; on the fourth takeoff the engine lost power. The pilot made a forced landing in an open field about a 1/4 mile from the departure end of runway 22R.

A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector responded to the accident site, and reported that fuel was evident in the fuel tanks, and no obvious mechanical problems were identified. The pilot reported to the FAA inspector that right after takeoff the engine quit, "it did not sputter or cough, it just quit."

Maintenance records indicated that the last annual inspection took place on October 3, 2012, at an engine total time of 3,231.3 hours (564.4 hours since overhaul). There were no additional maintenance entries in the logbook following the annual inspection. According to the FAA inspector, the mechanic who was flying the airplane at the time of the accident, indicated that the engine's fuel system had been adjusted prior to the accident flight in accordance with Continental Motor's Service Information Directive (SID) 97-3E with only "minor adjustments" being made. There was no record of the work performed in the engine logbook.

Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that both propeller blades sustained bending deformation in the aft direction, with one blade being bent more than the other. The nose section of the airplane, including the nose landing gear, sustained crushing damage. Both magnetos were secured to their respective mounting pads at the engine. The ignition leads were secured to their respective sparkplugs in good condition with no signs of fretting. The top sparkplugs were removed and examined using the Champion Aviation Service Manual AV6-R as a reference. The fine wire electrodes appeared to be in a normal wear condition with little-to-no evidence of lead fouling or soot. With the sparkplugs removed, a borescope inspection was performed on all six cylinders with no anomalies noted to the cylinders, piston heads, or valves. Compression was tested by rotating the propeller by hand; thumb compression and suction were obtained on all six cylinders. The fuel line between the low and high pressure auxiliary fuel boost pumps sustained impact damage, as well as the line that bypasses the low pressure auxiliary fuel boost pump. Further examination of the fuel system confirmed that fuel lines

---

# Pilot Information

## Pilot Information

| Certificate: | Private |
| --- | --- |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 Without waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Flight Time: | 277.3 hours (Total, all aircraft), 21.2 hours (Total, this make and model), 232.8 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0.8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

| Age: | 39 |
| --- | --- |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | February 10, 2008 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |

from each tank were not blocked from the pickup tubes at each wing root through the fuel selector to the fuel strainer. In addition, a test of the high and low pressure auxiliary fuel boost pumps found that only the high pressure pump was operational.

A fixed-pitch, two-bladed propeller was installed for an engine run test. Electric power was supplied to the alternate electric boost pump, and the engine was started using the accident airplane's ignition/starting system. With the engine started, electrical power was disconnected to the electric boost pump. The engine ran through various power settings on the engine driven pump with no anomalies noted. The engine power was limited to 2,400 rpm during the examination. The engine's mixture control was adjusted throughout the engine run, and the fuel flow and rpm instrument readings represented what was to be expected for all of the given adjustments. The engine ran for a total 22 minutes through the various throttle and mixture settings with no anomalies noted. The engine examination and engine ground run did not reveal any abnormalities that would have prevented normal operation and the production of rated horsepower.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Cessna

## Registration: 
N9507X

## Model/Series:
210A

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
1961

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
21057807

## Landing Gear Type:
Tricycle

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
October 3, 2012 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
3234 Hrs at time of accident

## Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
IO-470 SERIES

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
260 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
CHD,1243 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
10:47 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
220°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3000 ft AGL

## Visibility
30 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
5 knots /

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / None

## Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 /

## Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 4°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Chandler, AZ (CHD )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Chandler, AZ (CHD )

## Type of Clearance:
VFR

## Departure Time:
11:15 Local

## Type of Airspace:
Class D

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Chandler Municipal Airport CHD |
| Airport Elevation: | 1243 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 22R |
| Runway Length/Width: | 4401 ft / 75 ft |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | 3 None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 4 None |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 33.26889,-111.811111(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Cornejo, Tealeye

## Additional Participating Persons:
Gary R Hendrickson; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ

## Original Publish Date:
November 5, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85918](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=85918)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).