# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Idabel, Oklahoma

## Date & Time: 
February 7, 2013, 12:00 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 172L

## Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN13LA167

## Registration:
N7974G

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

The solo student pilot stated that, while landing, the airplane began to veer left when its nosewheel contacted the runway. He attempted to correct with full right rudder but was unable to regain control of the airplane. The airplane departed the left side of the runway and struck a drainage ditch, which resulted in the shearing off of the nose landing gear. An examination of the airplane wreckage did not reveal any preimpact anomalies with the engine or airframe that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The student pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing, which resulted in a runway excursion.

## Findings

| Personnel issues | Aircraft control - Pilot |
| --- | --- |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Landing | Loss of control on ground (Defining event) |
| Landing | Runway excursion |
| Landing | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On February 7, 2013, about 1200 central standard time, a Cessna 172L airplane, N7974G, departed the side of the runway while landing at the McCurtain Country Regional Airport (4O4), Idabel, Oklahoma. The solo student pilot was not injured. The airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to Arrow Aviation LLC and operated by the Texarkana Flying Club under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan. The flight originated from the Texarkana Regional Airport (KTXK), Texarkana, Arkansas, about 1115, and was en route to 4O4.

According to a statement provided by the pilot, while landing on runway 20, the airplane began to veer to the left as soon as the nose landing gear contacted the runway. The pilot attempted to correct with full right rudder and was unable to regain control of the airplane. The airplane departed the left side of the runway and rolled in to a grass field where the nose gear struck a drainage ditch and sheared off the nose landing gear. The airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted. Substantial damage was sustained to the vertical stabilizer and rudder. An examination of the airplane wreckage by responding Federal Aviation Administration inspectors did not detect any preimpact malfunctions or failures with the engine or airframe. Prevailing wind was from 180 degrees at 7 knots.

## Student pilot Information

| Certificate: | Student |
| Age: | 38,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | None |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | August 17, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |
| Flight Time: | 37 hours (Total, all aircraft), 16 hours (Total, this make and model), 9 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | Cessna |
| --- | --- |
| Model/Series: | 172L |
| Year of Manufacture: |  |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Normal |
| Landing Gear Type: | Tricycle |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | January 8, 2013 100 hour |
| Time Since Last Inspection: |  |
| Airframe Total Time: | 2608 Hrs as of last inspection |
| ELT: | C91A installed, not activated |
| Registered Owner: | Arrow Aviation LLC |
| Operator: | Texarkana Flying Club |

| Registration: | N7974G |
| Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Amateur Built: |  |
| Serial Number: | 17259674 |
| Seats: | 4 |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 2300 lbs |
| Engines: | 1 Reciprocating |
| Engine Manufacturer: | LYCOMING |
| Engine Model/Series: | O-320 SERIES |
| Rated Power: | 180 Horsepower |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | None |

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

| Conditions at Accident Site: | Visual (VMC) |
| --- | --- |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | K4O4 |
| Observation Time: | 11:55 Local |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Clear |
| Lowest Ceiling: | None |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 7 knots / |
| Wind Direction: | 180° |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30.12 inches Hg |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Texarkana, AR (KTXK) |
| Destination: | Idabel, OK (K4O4) |
| Departure Time: | 11:15 Local |

| Condition of Light: | Day |
| Distance from Accident Site: |  |
| Direction from Accident Site: |  |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 14°C / 0°C |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Type of Clearance: | None |
| Type of Airspace: |  |

---

# Airport Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Airport: | MC CURTAIN COUNTY RGNL 4O4 |
| Airport Elevation: | 471 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 20 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 5002 ft / 75 ft |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Touch and go;Traffic pattern |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | - |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 33.909168,-94.859443(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Aguilera, Jason

## Additional Participating Persons:
Troy Fields; FAA; Oklahoma City, OK

## Original Publish Date:
February 10, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=86262](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=86262)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).