# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Broomfield, Colorado

## Date & Time: 
March 15, 2013, 14:08 Local

## Aircraft:
Ryan Navion

## Defining Event:
Loss of lift

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN13LA199

## Registration:
N4276K

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
4 None

## Analysis

After takeoff from a 9,000-foot runway, the pilot retracted the landing gear. Shortly thereafter, the airspeed dropped, followed by an excessive descent rate. The pilot lowered the landing gear and landed the airplane on the runway before it departed the runway and the nose gear collapsed. The pilot attributed the excessive descent rate to wind shear. The weather information obtained by the pilot before the flight indicated gusting, variable, and turbulent wind conditions at a high density altitude, so the pilot should have been aware that conditions were favorable for wind shear. Further, the pilot should have applied a wind/gust correction factor to the takeoff speed to maintain a safe airspeed margin and to maintain airplane climb performance. The airplane's climb performance was further degraded by the effects of density altitude and the overweight condition of the airplane due to the pilot's erroneous weight and balance calculations.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's inadequate preflight planning and decision to take off at a high density altitude and in gusting wind conditions.

---

# Findings

## Personnel issues
* Decision making/judgment - Pilot
* (general) - Pilot

## Environmental issues
* High density altitude - Effect on operation
* Gusts - Effect on operation

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Initial climb | Loss of lift (Defining event) |
| Uncontrolled descent | Attempted remediation/recovery |
| Landing-flare/touchdown | Loss of control on ground |
| Landing-landing roll | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On March 15, 2013, at 1408 mountain daylight time, a Ryan Navion, N4276K, settled onto the runway during an initial climb and subsequently veered off the runway at Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport, Broomfield, Colorado. The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings when it impacted terrain. The pilot and three passengers were uninjured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that was destined to Albuquerque International Sunport Airport, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

The pilot stated that after a "normal" run up, he began a takeoff roll on runway 29R (9,000 feet by 100 feet, asphalt). The takeoff roll was "normal" and he rotated the airplane at 60 mph as per the airplane flight manual. He then established a best angle of climb (Vx) at 80 mph. Upon positive rate of climb, he retracted the landing gear so as not to exceed the 100 mph landing gear speed limitation. After gear retraction, the airspeed deteriorated quickly from 80 mph to 60 mph. The pilot said he immediately reduced pitch to regain airspeed. An excessive descent rate caused him to extend the landing gear and level the wings for an imminent ground impact.

The pilot stated that he made an error in the airplane weight and balance calculation by failing to add the weight of fuel in the airplane wingtip tanks, which resulted in the airplane having a takeoff weight of 3,208 lbs. The maximum gross weight of the airplane was 3,100 lbs.

The pilot stated that the airplane was equipped with a higher horsepower engine and therefore equivalent to a later model of airplane, which had a maximum gross weight of 3,300 lbs.

The pilot stated that he has been an airline pilot for 15 years and received windshear training every 6 months. He said he has been through countless windshear training events. He believed that the quick recognition of the event and proper recovery techniques that he had learned enabled him to keep the airplane under as much control as possible.

According to the Navion Operation Manual, Normal Takeoff, states:

1. At a speed of approximately 60 to 65 mph, raise nose wheel from ground by applying gentle back pressure to the control wheel. At 70 mph, very slight additional back pressure will cause the airplane to take off.

2. Maintain an airspeed of at least 80 mph during initial climb.

---

# All [climb] rates shown were computed at 95 mph with full throttle and 2300 rpm to give highest rate of climb and most efficient engine cooling.

According to the Navion type certificate holder, Vx is 70 mph.

The Flight Training Handbook, AC 61-21A, Normal Liftoff, states:

During takeoffs in a strong, gusty wind it is advisable that an extra margin of speed be obtained before the airplane is allowed to leave the ground, since a takeoff at the normal takeoff speed may result in lack of positive control, or a stall, when the airplane encounters a sudden lull in strong gusty wind, or other turbulent air currents. In this case the pilot should hold the airplane on the ground longer to attain more speed, then make a smooth, positive rotation to leave the ground.

## Pilot Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Certificate: | Airline transport; Commercial |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land; Multi-engine land |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 1 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | July 23, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot: | Yes |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | November 4, 2012 |
| Flight Time: | 9866 hours (Total, all aircraft), 7 hours (Total, this make and model), 5278 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 214 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 68 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: 
Ryan

## Registration:
N4276K

## Model/Series:
Navion UNDESIGNAT

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
NAV-4-1276

## Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
January 15, 2013 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3100 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
4800.1 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
Continental

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
IO-470-N

## Registered Owner:
Pilot

## Rated Power:
260 Horsepower

## Operator:
Pilot

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
BJC

## Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
13:45 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8000 ft AGL

## Visibility
50 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 20000 ft AGL

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
 / 

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
29.94 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / -13°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Denver, CO (DEN )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Albuquerque, NM (ABQ )

## Type of Clearance:
Unknown

## Departure Time:
13:08 Local

## Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Rocky Mountain Metropolitan BJC |
| Airport Elevation: | 5673 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 29R |
| Runway Length/Width: | 9000 ft / 100 ft |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | None |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | 3 None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 4 None |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 39.908889,-105.117225(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Gallo, Mitchell

## Additional Participating Persons:
Keith Burke; Federal Aviation Administration; Denver, CO

## Original Publish Date:
June 2, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=86448](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=86448)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).