# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Byron, California

## Date & Time: 
March 16, 2013, 13:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-38-112

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR13LA171

## Registration:
N99DM

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

During the initial climb after takeoff, the airplane's engine began to sputter, and it subsequently lost total power. The pilot made a forced landing in a grass field, and, during the landing roll, the right wing and fuselage were substantially damaged. Postaccident examination revealed that fuel was present in both wing tanks, and no evidence of fuel contamination was found. An attempt to run the engine was unsuccessful because of discrepancies with the airplane's electrical system, gascolator, and the engine's starter. However, none of these discrepancies would have resulted in a loss of engine power. The cause of the engine failure could not be determined.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A loss of engine power during initial climb for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.

## Findings

Not determined (general) - Unknown/Not determined

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Initial climb | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |

On March 16, 2013, at 1330 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA-38-112, N99DM, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power on takeoff initial climb near Byron, California. The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured. The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. No flight plan had been filed for the cross-country flight to Livermore, California. The flight was originating from the Byron Airport at the time of the accident, and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.

The pilot reported that he had just taken off, and the end of the runway was passing underneath him when the airplane's engine began to sputter and then lost power. He declared an emergency on the radio, set up a glide, changed fuel tanks, turned on the electric fuel boost pump, and flared for landing. He landed in a field immediately next to airport property. During the landing roll in the grass field, the right main landing gear encountered several gopher holes, bending the right wing and right side of the fuselage.

A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the accident site, and he reported that 5 and 6 gallons of fuel were drained from the left and right wing tanks, respectively. A visual examination of the fuel revealed no indication of contamination. The wings were removed from the airplane, and the airplane was transported to a salvage yard.

On April 16, 2013, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector attempted to perform an engine run at the salvage yard. Difficulty was encountered in energizing the airplane's electrical system, and therefore, the airplane's electric fuel boost pump could not be used to supply fuel to the engine. While manually priming the fuel system, a leak was found at the gascolator. The gascolator was disassembled, and a crack in the upper flange of the metal bowl extending around about a third of its circumference was found. The gascolator was bypassed in order to supply fuel directly to the carburetor. When a start was attempted, the starter was not capable of turning over the engine. No further examination was conducted.

---

# Pilot Information

| Certificate: | Private |
| --- | --- |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 With waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | UNK |
| Flight Time: | 735 hours (Total, all aircraft), 339 hours (Total, this make and model), 12 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | Piper |
| --- | --- |
| Model/Series: | PA-38-112 |
| Year of Manufacture: | 1978 |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Normal |
| Landing Gear Type: | Tricycle |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | May 17, 2012 Annual |
| Time Since Last Inspection: | Engines: 1 Reciprocating |
| Airframe Total Time: | 2782 Hrs at time of accident |
| ELT: | Installed, not activated |
| Registered Owner: | Rivair LLC |
| Operator: | Leandro A. Rivera |

| Age: | 62 |
| --- | --- |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Restraint Used: | Unknown |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | June 25, 2012 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |

| Registration: | N99DM |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Amateur Built: |  |
| Serial Number: | 38-78A0487 |
| Seats: | 2 |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 1670 lbs |
| Engine Manufacturer: | Lycoming |
| Engine Model/Series: | O-235 |
| Rated Power: | 112 Horsepower |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | None |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Visual (VMC) | Condition of Light: Day |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | LVK,440 ft msl |
| Distance from Accident Site: | 13 Nautical Miles |
| Observation Time: | 12:53 Local |
| Direction from Accident Site: | 230° |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Clear |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Lowest Ceiling: | Visibility (RVR): |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 14 knots / Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / None |
| Wind Direction: | 210° Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / N/A |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30.04 inches Hg |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 21°C / 9°C |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Byron, CA (C83 ) |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Destination: | Livermore, CA (LVK ) |
| Type of Clearance: | None |
| Departure Time: | 13:30 Local |
| Type of Airspace: |

# Airport Information

| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Byron Airport C83 |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Airport Elevation: | 79 ft msl |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| Runway Used: | 23 |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| Runway Length/Width: | 3000 ft / 75 ft |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Passenger Injuries: | Aircraft Fire: None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 37.822498,-121.631942 |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Struhsaker, James

## Additional Participating Persons:
Larry N Schultz; FAA FSDO; Oakland, CA

## Original Publish Date:
July 30, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=86546](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=86546)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.