# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Juneau, Alaska

## Date & Time: 
June 11, 2013, 21:00 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-18A 150

## Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ANC13CA055

## Registration:
N1886P

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

The pilot stated that she was flying the airplane from the front seat, and the airplane owner (who is also a pilot) was in the rear seat. The pilot in the front seat turned final early to maintain aircraft separation and made a short and slightly steep final approach. She said that while landing she flared the airplane a little high, and it bounced twice during the landing. During the second bounce, the pilot in the rear seat assisted the recovery by applying corrective input. The pilot in the front seat could not recall if she continued to apply control inputs or if the pilot in the rear seat had assumed the controls. Positive control transfer was not accomplished. The airplane ground looped to the right, substantially damaging the left wing when the wing tip struck the runway. The pilot reported no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot did not maintain directional control while attempting to recover from a bounced landing.

## Findings

| Aircraft | Directional control - Not attained/maintained |
| --- | --- |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight
| Landing-landing roll | Loss of control on ground (Defining event) |

## Pilot Information
| Certificate: | Commercial |
| Age: | 42,Female |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Seat Occupied: | Front |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | December 28, 2012 |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |
| Flight Time: | 574 hours (Total, all aircraft), 55 hours (Total, this make and model) |

## Co-pilot Information
| Certificate: | Commercial |
| Age: | 66,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land; Single-engine sea |
| Seat Occupied: | Rear |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | April 12, 2013 |
| Occupational Pilot: |  |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | April 15, 2012 |
| Flight Time: | (Estimated) 12589 hours (Total, all aircraft), 9578 hours (Total, this make and model) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Piper
Registration: N1886P

Model/Series: PA-18A 150  
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture:  
Amateur Built:

Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 18-4169

Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel
Seats: 1

Date/Type of Last Inspection:  
June 8, 2013 100 hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2000 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection:  
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

Airframe Total Time: 12500 Hrs as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: O-320 SERIES

Registered Owner: ALLIGOOD ALLEN K
Rated Power: 180 Horsepower

Operator: ALLIGOOD ALLEN K
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility, Elevation: PAJN,25 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 

Observation Time: 20:53 Local
Direction from Accident Site:

Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 12000 ft AGL
Visibility: 10 miles

Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 20000 ft AGL
Visibility (RVR):

Wind Speed/Gusts: 4 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:  /

Wind Direction: 180°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:  /

Altimeter Setting: 29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 21°C / 8°C

Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation

Departure Point: Yakutat, AK (PAYA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed: VFR

Destination: Juneau, AK (PAJN)
Type of Clearance: None

Departure Time: 17:30 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Airport: | Juneau International Airport PAJN |
| Airport Elevation: | 26 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 26 |
| Runway Length/Width: |  |
| Runway Surface Type: |  |
| Runway Surface Condition: |  |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Traffic pattern |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 2 None |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 58.354721,-134.57611 |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
McKenny, Van

## Additional Participating Persons:
Jon Percy; Federal Aviation Administratin; Juneau, AK

## Original Publish Date:
July 29, 2013

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87218](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87218)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87218).