# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Chualar, California

## Date & Time: 
August 4, 2013, 10:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Bell 206B

## Defining Event:
Low altitude operation/event

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural

## Accident Number:
WPR13LA358

## Registration:
N90146

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 Minor

## Analysis

The pilot stated that he was operating the helicopter at a low altitude when he heard a loud boom and then noted a decrease in main rotor rpm. During the ensuing emergency landing, the helicopter impacted the ground, the tail boom separated from the fuselage, and the helicopter rolled onto its right side. Postaccident examination revealed that the main driveshaft had disconnected and that the bolts attaching the forward coupling to the transmission had failed. Portions of two of the four bolts that attached the forward coupling to the transmission were found, and the fractured threaded remnants (with nuts attached) were examined. One of the remnants was fractured through its entire cross-section due to fatigue, and the other remnant fractured through about 75% of its cross-section due to fatigue; the remainder of the failure on this remnant occurred in overload. Both fracture faces had multiple fatigue origins around about 1/4 of their circumferences, indicating relatively high stresses. No mechanical damage was noted at the fatigue origin locations. One of the remnants displayed smearing of adjacent threads and decreased height of the nut, suggesting this bolt had a relatively large amount of play. It is likely that the large amount of play was due to improper torqueing of the bolts when the driveshaft was reinstalled after extensive maintenance that was performed on the helicopter about 3 months and 197 flight hours before the accident.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

Maintenance personnel's failure to properly tighten the bolts securing the main driveshaft to the transmission, which resulted in fatigue failure of the bolts and disconnection of the driveshaft during low-altitude flight.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
(general) - Failure

## Personnel issues
Scheduled/routine maintenance - Maintenance personnel

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Maneuvering | Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail |
| Maneuvering-low-alt flying | Low altitude operation/event (Defining event) |

On August 4, 2013, about 1030 Pacific daylight time, a Bell 206B-III helicopter, N90146, was substantially damaged when it landed hard during a forced landing near Chualar, California. The commercial pilot, the sole occupant on board, received minor injuries. R and B Helicopters, Inc., Salinas, California, was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local aerial application flight, which was operating from a remote supply truck nearby. The helicopter had been airborne for about 10 minutes, and was returning to the truck for more applicant at the time of the accident. A flight plan had not been filed.

The pilot reported hearing a loud boom followed by a decrease in main rotor rpm. He reported having minimal flight controllability to ground impact seconds later. The tail boom separated during the run-on landing, and the fuselage subsequently rolled onto its right side.

Postaccident examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and the operator found that the main driveshaft connecting the engine to the main transmission had disconnected. The part was sent to Bell Helicopter's Metallurgical Laboratory, Fort Worth, Texas, where it was examined under the supervision of an FAA inspector. Examination of the driveshaft revealed evidence indicating that the bolts attaching the forward coupling to the transmission had failed.

Fractured threaded remnants (with nuts attached) of two of the four bolts that attached the forward coupling to the transmission were examined; no remnants of the other two bolts were recovered. The two remnants both fractured in a relatively high cycle fatigue mode. One of the remnants fractured through its entire cross-section via fatigue, and the other remnant fractured through about 75% of its cross-section via fatigue before it completed the failure in overload. Both fracture faces had multiple fatigue origins around approximately 1/4 of their circumferences indicating relatively high stresses. No mechanical damage was noted at the fatigue origin locations. One of the remnants displayed smearing on the faying surface, smearing of adjacent threads, and decreased height of the nut, suggesting this bolt had a relatively large amount of play.

On May 6, 2013, the helicopter had undergone an overhaul of most of its major components, including the transmission and engine. At this time, the main driveshaft was removed and replaced. The helicopter had flown 197 hours since completion of this work.

---

# Pilot Information

| Certificate: | Commercial; Private |
| --- | --- |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | Helicopter |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | Yes |
| Flight Time: | 16000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5000 hours (Total, this make and model), 130 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| Aircraft Make: | Bell |
| --- | --- |
| Model/Series: | 206B III |
| Year of Manufacture: | 1975 |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Restricted (Special) |
| Landing Gear Type: | Skid |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | July 10, 2013 100 hour |
| Time Since Last Inspection: | Engines: 1 Turbo shaft |
| Airframe Total Time: | 18985 Hrs as of last inspection |
| ELT: | Not installed |
| Registered Owner: | R AND B HELICOPTERS INC |
| Operator: | R AND B HELICOPTERS INC |

| Age: | 58 |
| --- | --- |
| Seat Occupied: | Right |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | March 5, 2013 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |

| Registration: | N90146 |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Category: | Helicopter |
| Amateur Built: |  |
| Serial Number: | 1614 |
| Seats: | 2 |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 3350 lbs |
| Engine Manufacturer: | Allison |
| Engine Model/Series: | 250-C20B |
| Rated Power: | 420 Horsepower |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | Agricultural aircraft (137) |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

| Conditions at Accident Site: | Visual (VMC) |
| --- | --- |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | SNS,85 ft msl |
| Observation Time: | 09:53 Local |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | 600 ft AGL |
| Lowest Ceiling: | Broken / 600 ft AGL |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: |  / |
| Wind Direction: |  / |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30.04 inches Hg |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Chualar, CA |
| Destination: | Chualar, CA |
| Departure Time: | 10:20 Local |

| Condition of Light: | Day |
| --- | --- |
| Distance from Accident Site: | 8 Nautical Miles |
| Direction from Accident Site: | 335° |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 13°C / 11°C |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Type of Clearance: | None |
| Type of Airspace: | Class G |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Crew Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| --- | --- |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 36.537498,-121.541664 |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Struhsaker, James

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Paul King; FAA; San Jose, CA
* Matthew Rigsby; FAA; Fort Worth, TX

## Original Publish Date:
January 30, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87661](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87661)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://here).