# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Vinton, Iowa

## Date & Time: 
August 6, 2013, 10:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Bell 47G-3B-1

## Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural

## Accident Number:
CEN13LA463

## Registration:
N83702

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

After reloading the helicopter with agricultural spray product, the pilot flew the helicopter off of the loading truck bed for the aerial application flight. Shortly after takeoff, while operating the helicopter at an altitude of about 10 feet above the ground, the pilot noted a decrease in rotor rpm and made a precautionary landing in tall grass. When he noted no anomalies after the landing, the pilot decided to continue the flight. He took off in the helicopter again and flew for about 100 yards before he again noted a decrease in rotor rpm. The helicopter descended and struck the ground with the tail low, which resulted in substantial damage to the tail rotor and tailboom. An examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The helicopter was operating above tall grass and crops while still in ground effect, which likely reduced the efficiency of the rotor system and decreased the amount of lift produced as compared to operating over bare ground. In addition, the helicopter was loaded to within 16 pounds of its maximum gross weight and was operating at a density altitude of about 2,800 feet, which likely also contributed to the decreased performance of the helicopter.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's operation of the helicopter at high gross weight and high density altitude while still in ground effect, which reduced the efficiency of the rotor system and the amount of lift produced, which resulted in a collision with terrain. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to continue the flight after the first indication of reduced performance.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
(general) - Not attained/maintained

## Personnel issues
* Incorrect action performance - Pilot
* Decision making/judgment - Pilot

## Aircraft
(general) - Capability exceeded

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

Takeoff | Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
--- | ---
Takeoff | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)

On August 6, 2013, about 1030 central daylight time, a Bell 47G-3B-1 helicopter, N83702, made a forced landing after experiencing a decrease in engine performance near Vinton, Iowa. The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured. The helicopter sustained substantial damage. The helicopter was registered to Benedict Fluke and operated by Speas Aviation Inc., under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 as an aerial application flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight which operated without a flight plan. The local flight was departing at the time of the accident.

In a statement provided by the pilot, the helicopter was loaded with 60 gallons of spray product. When the helicopter lifted off of the truck bed, the pilot noted that the rotor rpm decreased so he landed. The pilot then decided to lift off from the ground and did not detect any anomalies with the helicopter. He flew the helicopter forward at 20 feet AGL and 20-25 miles per hour groundspeed over a bean field. The rotor rpm decreased again so the pilot elected to land in the field. The helicopter struck the ground with the tail low, which resulted in damage to the tail rotor and tail boom.

## Pilot Information

Certificate | Commercial; Flight instructor
--- | ---
Age | 46
Airplane Rating(s) | None
Seat Occupied | Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s) | Helicopter
Restraint Used | Lap only
Instrument Rating(s) | Helicopter
Second Pilot Present | No
Instructor Rating(s) | Helicopter
Toxicology Performed | No
Medical Certification | Class 2 With waivers/limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam | December 24, 2012
Occupational Pilot | Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent | April 16, 2013
Flight Time | 1347 hours (Total, all aircraft), 210 hours (Total, this make and model), 548 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 41 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 41 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

The pilot, age 46, held a commercial pilot certificate for a helicopter and an instrument helicopter rating. He also held a flight instructor certificate for helicopters. The pilot reported having accumulated 1,352 total flight hours, of which 1,315 hours were in a helicopter, and 210 hours were in the make and model of the accident helicopter. He had accumulated 41 hours in the accident helicopter in the preceding 30 days.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Bell
Registration: N83702

## Model/Series: 47G-3B-1
Aircraft Category: Helicopter

Year of Manufacture: 1966
Amateur Built: 

## Airworthiness Certificate: Restricted (Special)
Serial Number: 66-8093

## Landing Gear Type: Skid
Seats: 3

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2850 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection: 
41 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
77 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

ELT: Not installed
Engine Model/Series: TVO-435-B1A

## Registered Owner:
Benedict Fluke
Rated Power: 270 Horsepower

## Operator:
Speas Aviation Inc
Operating Certificate(s) Held: Agricultural aircraft (137)

Operator Does Business As: 
Operator Designator Code: S8PG

The Bell 47G-3B-1 four-seat, single engine, agricultural equipped helicopter was manufactured in 1966. A review of the maintenance logbooks revealed that an annual inspection was completed on July 17, 2013. According to the pilot, the helicopter accumulated 77 hours of total flight time and 41 hours since the last annual inspection.

The helicopter had a maximum gross weight of 2,850 pounds.

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
KVTI,842 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 10 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
10:55 Local
Direction from Accident Site:

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear
Visibility 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
3 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
29.88 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 27°C / 21°C

Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
Vinton, IA
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination:
Vinton, IA
Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
10:30 Local
Type of Airspace:

At 1035, an automated weather report at the Vinton Veterens Memorial Airpark, which was about 10

---

# Accident Report

## Accident Details

- Location: 42.176666, -91.980834 (estimated)
- Wind: 240 degrees at 3 knots, 10 miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 27°C, dew point 22°C, barometric pressure 29.89 inches of mercury
- Pilot reported variable wind favoring 180 degrees at 3-5 knots

## Wreckage and Impact Information

| Category | Details |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries | N/A |
| Ground Injuries | N/A |
| Total Injuries | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire | None |
| Aircraft Explosion | None |
| Latitude, Longitude | 42.176666, -91.980834 (estimated) |

The helicopter came to rest upright in a bean field. The main rotor blades and tail rotor blades impacted the ground and sustained damage. The tail boom was separated from the helicopter. A post-accident examination did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airframe or engine that would have precluded normal operation.

## Additional Information

### Video Footage

The flight was being recorded by a hand-held recording device. The video footage revealed that the pilot flew the helicopter off the truck bed, flew about 50 yards while maintaining an altitude of about 10 feet above the ground (AGL), and then landed in tall grass. Shortly after, the helicopter lifted off again and flew over a bean field for about 100 yards. The helicopter descended and the pilot executed a forced landing straight ahead in the bean field. The helicopter struck the ground with the tail low, which resulted in damage to the tail boom and tail rotor.

The video footage was reviewed by a representative of Scott's Helicopter Services, the helicopter's type-certificate holder and a party to the investigation. He noted that when the helicopter first settled in the grass, the pilot should have assessed the weight and balance and possibly off-loaded applicant. The flight path of the second attempt, the pilot did not fly along the road, but chose a flight path over standing crops. The engine sounds were normal during the takeoff but then sounded as though the engine was "lugged down" as the takeoff continued.

### Weight and Balance and Density Altitude Calculations

The report mentions calculations related to weight and balance, as well as density altitude, but does not provide the specific details.

---

# Helicopter Flying Handbook

## Aerodynamics

Chapter 2 "Aerodynamics" defines "In Ground Effect (IGE)" as the increased efficiency of the rotor system caused by interference of the airflow when near the ground. The air pressure or density is increased, which acts to decrease the downward velocity of air. Ground effect permits relative wind to be more horizontal, lift vector to be more vertical, and induced drag to be reduced. These conditions allow the rotor system to be more efficient. Maximum ground effect is achieved when hovering over smooth hard surfaces. When hovering over surfaces as tall grass, trees, bushes, rough terrain, and water, maximum ground effect is reduced. Rotor efficiency is increased by ground effect to a height of about one rotor diameter (measured from the ground to the rotor disk) for most helicopters.

## Helicopter Performance

An excerpt from Chapter 7 "Helicopter Performance" states:

As density altitude increases, more power is required to hover. At some point, the power required is equal to the power available. This establishes the hovering ceiling under the existing conditions. Any adjustment to the gross weight by varying fuel, payload, or both, affects the hovering ceiling. The heavier the gross weight, the lower the hovering ceiling.

According the responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the weight and balance calculations revealed that the helicopter was loaded 16 pounds under the maximum gross weight. The density altitude at the time of the accident was calculated about 2,800 feet.

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lindberg, Joshua

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Roger Clark; FAA; Des Moines, IA
* Tony Will; FAA; Des Moines, IA
* Scott Churchill; Scott's Helicopter Services; Le Sueur, MN

## Original Publish Date:
January 30, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87697](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87697)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=87697).