# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Omaha, Texas

## Date & Time: 
October 23, 2013, 08:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Bell OH-58C

## Defining Event:
Hard landing

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural

## Accident Number:
CEN14LA022

## Registration:
N911CC

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

The pilot stated that, as the airplane was on approach to land on a field during an aerial application flight, the helicopter's left skid dug into the field's high grass and loose dirt. The helicopter spun around, and the main rotor contacted the tail boom. The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions or failures with the helicopter that would have precluded normal operation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's failure to assess and compensate for the landing surface, which included high grass and loose dirt.

## Findings

| Finding | Contribution |
| --- | --- |
| Environmental issues (general) | Contributed to outcome |
| Aircraft (general) | Not attained/maintained |
| Personnel issues (general) | Pilot |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Approach | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |
| --- | --- |
| Landing-flare/touchdown | Hard landing (Defining event) |
| Landing-flare/touchdown | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On October 23, 2013, about 0830 central daylight time, a Bell OH-58C, N911CC, impacted terrain during a hard landing on a field near Omaha, Texas. The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the tail boom and main rotor blade(s). The commercial pilot was uninjured. The helicopter was registered to an individual and operated by Reynolds Aviation under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 as an aerial application flight that was not operating on a flight plan. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that originated from Winnsboro, Texas, at 0700 and was destined for Omaha, Texas.

The pilot stated that he was approaching to land with a load of chemical when the left skid dug into high grass and loose dirt. The helicopter spun around, and the main rotor contacted the tail boom.

The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction/failure with the helicopter.

## Pilot Information

| Certificate | Commercial; Flight engineer |
| --- | --- |
| Age | 49 |
| Airplane Rating(s) | None |
| Seat Occupied | Right |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s) | Helicopter |
| Restraint Used | Unknown |
| Instrument Rating(s) | None |
| Second Pilot Present | No |
| Instructor Rating(s) | Helicopter |
| Toxicology Performed | No |
| Medical Certification | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam | May 14, 2013 |
| Occupational Pilot | Yes |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent | March 30, 2013 |
| Flight Time | 9646 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5000 hours (Total, this make and model), 211 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 76 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Bell
Registration: N911CC

## Model/Series: OH-58C
Aircraft Category: Helicopter

Year of Manufacture: 1970
Amateur Built: 

## Airworthiness Certificate: Restricted (Special)
Serial Number: 68-16800

## Landing Gear Type: High skid
Seats: 1

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
September 24, 2013 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 3200 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Turbo shaft
Airframe Total Time: 10287 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: Allison

ELT: Not installed
Engine Model/Series: T63-A720

## Registered Owner: Individual
Rated Power: 420 Horsepower

## Operator: Individual
Operating Certificate(s) Held: Agricultural aircraft (137)

## Operator Does Business As: Reynolds Aviation
Operator Designator Code: DYLG

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility, Elevation: OSA,364 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 10 Nautical Miles

Observation Time: 08:55 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 225°

Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility: 10 miles

Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):

Wind Speed/Gusts: / 
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / None

Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / N/A

Altimeter Setting: 30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 11°C / 11°C

Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation

Departure Point: Winnsboro, TX
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

Destination: Omaha, TX
Type of Clearance: None

Departure Time: 07:00 Local
Type of Airspace: Unknown

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | Aircraft Fire: None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 33.169723,-94.739959(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Gallo, Mitchell

## Additional Participating Persons:
Andrew Varner; Federal Aviation Administration, North Texas FSDO; Irving, TX

## Original Publish Date:
April 23, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88326](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88326)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).