# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Canton, Georgia

## Date & Time: 
January 4, 2014, 15:30 Local

## Aircraft:
FK LIGHTPLANES FK9 ELA SW

## Defining Event:
Landing gear collapse

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ERA14LA089

## Registration:
N611SP

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

The pilot reported that, while in cruise flight, the engine experienced a partial power loss. The airplane was unable to maintain altitude, so the pilot chose to perform an off-airport landing to an open field. During the landing roll, the airplane encountered a berm, became airborne, and then landed hard.

Examination of the engine revealed that the carburetor float chamber vent lines had been incorrectly routed to the air filter. The engine manufacturer's installation manual cautioned that the float chamber vent lines must not be routed into the slipstream or down the firewall because "pressure differences between the intake pressure in the carburetor chambers may lead to engine malfunction due to incorrect fuel supply." Therefore, it is likely that the incorrectly installed vent line resulted in back pressure to the float bowl that exceeded the normal operating range, which would have affected the engine's fuel-air mixture and led to the partial loss of engine power.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A partial loss of engine power during cruise flight due to an overly lean fuel-air mixture, which resulted from an incorrectly installed float chamber vent line and led to a subsequent off-airport landing.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
(general) - Incorrect service/maintenance

## Personnel issues
Installation - Maintenance personnel

## Environmental issues
Rough terrain - Contributed to outcome

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (partial)
--- | ---
Landing | Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll | Landing gear collapse (Defining event)

On January 4, 2014, about 1530 eastern standard time, a FK Lightplanes FK9, light-sport airplane, N611SP, was substantially damaged following a partial loss of engine power while in cruise flight near Canton, Georgia. The pilot subsequently made an off airport forced landing to an open field. The certificated private pilot and passenger were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight destined for Cobb County Airport – McCollum Field (RYY), Kennesaw, Georgia. The fight originated from Mustang Field Airport (0GA1), Hartwell, Georgia, about 1500. The airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.

According to the pilot, while in cruise flight the fuel pressure gauge indicated a decrease in fuel pressure from 5.4 gallons per hour (gph) to 0.1 gph and the rpm subsequently decreased. After activating the auxiliary fuel pump, he was able to restart the engine; however, only partial power was restored. Unable to maintain altitude, an off airport emergency landing was performed to a nearby field. Upon landing the airplane encountered a berm, became airborne, and landed hard, which resulted in the left main landing gear and nose landing gear to separating from the airplane.

## Pilot Information

Certificate: | Private
--- | ---
Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land
Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None
Instrument Rating(s): | None
Instructor Rating(s): | None
Medical Certification: | Class 3 With waivers/limitations
Occupational Pilot: | No
Flight Time: | 83.6 hours (Total, all aircraft), 16.7 hours (Total, this make and model), 45.5 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 7.5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4.5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2.5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

The pilot, age 30, held a private and sport pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land, and a third-class medical certificated issued December 10, 2012. The pilot reported 83.7 total flight hours with 16.8 of those hours in the accident aircraft make and model.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: FK LIGHTPLANES
Registration: N611SP

## Model/Series: FK9 ELA SW
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 2010
Amateur Built: 

Airworthiness Certificate: Special light-sport (Special)
Serial Number: 09-419

Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 2

Date/Type of Last Inspection:
March 5, 2013 Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 1144 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection: 61 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

Airframe Total Time: 591 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: Rotax

ELT: C91A installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series: 912ULS

Registered Owner: On file
Rated Power: 100 Horsepower

Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

The two-seat, high-wing, fixed-gear airplane was built in 2010. It was powered by a Rotax 912ULS 100-hp engine and was driven by a Warpdrive DUC 3-blade fixed-pitch propeller. The most recent condition inspection was completed on March 5, 2013 with a recorded aircraft time in service of 503.0 hours. According to the pilot, at the time of the accident, the aircraft had accumulated 590.9 total hours.

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)
- Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- KCNI,1219 ft msl
- Distance from Accident Site: 8 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 15:35 Local
- Direction from Accident Site: 307°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Thin Overcast / 1500 ft AGL
- Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- Overcast / 1500 ft AGL
- Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- 9 knots /
- Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / None

## Wind Direction:
- 90°
- Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / 

## Altimeter Setting:
- 30.27 inches Hg
- Temperature/Dew Point: 2°C / -11°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
- No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
- Hartwell, GA (0GA1)
- Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination:
- Atlanta, GA (RYY )
- Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
- 15:00 Local
- Type of Airspace: Class G

The recorded weather at Cherokee County Airport (CNI), Canton, Georgia, which was located 8 miles to the northwest of the accident location, included overcast clouds at 1500 feet above ground level, wind from 090 degrees at 9 knots, temperature 2 degrees C, and dew point -11 degrees C.

# Airport Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Airport: | CHEROKEE COUNTY CNI |
| Airport Elevation: | 1219 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | IFR Approach: None |
| Runway Length/Width: | VFR Approach/Landing: Precautionary landing |
| Runway Surface Type: | |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry;Rough;Vegetation |

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
* 1 None

## Passenger Injuries:
* 1 None

## Ground Injuries: 
* N/A

## Total Injuries:
* 2 None

## Aircraft Damage:
* Substantial

## Aircraft Fire:
* None

## Aircraft Explosion:
* None

## Latitude, Longitude:
* 34.230834,-84.29528(est)

Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed that it came to rest with the left wing contacting the ground and the firewall was damaged. The left wing fuel tank had an undetermined amount of fuel and the right wing fuel tank was devoid of fuel. Initial examination of the engine revealed compression on all cylinders and the automotive fuel, that was located throughout the fuel system, was free of debris.

Examination of the engine by a representative from the engine manufacturer, with FAA oversight, revealed that the engine remained attached to the airframe and that the spark plugs appeared "normal" in appearance. The electric fuel pump was tested and was operational, fuel was present in the fuel bowls, and the airframe fuel vent tube was observed with no blockage noted. The engine was started and operated at normal power settings utilizing the fuel from the aircraft, with no abnormalities noted. Further examination revealed that the float chamber vent lines had been routed from the carburetor into the air filter. The engine did not have, nor was it required to have, carburetor heat and utilized radiant heating from the engine to minimize carburetor icing possibilities.

# Additional Information

## Rotax Installation Manual
A review of the Rotax installation manual for the 912 Series engine, Chapter 15.1 "Requirements on the carburetor" provided a caution message which stated in part, "The float chamber venting lines have to be routed into a ram-air and vacuum free zone or into the airbox…these lines must not be routed into the slipstream or down the firewall. Pressure differences between intake pressure in the carburetor chambers may lead to engine malfunction due to incorrect fuel supply."

According to a representative from the engine manufacturer, the routing of the carburetor venting line to the air filters influenced the fuel-air mixture of the engine and, in certain flight conditions, the engine may experience a lack of fuel due in part to the back pressure in the float bowl exceeding the normal operating range.

## FAA Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Etcher, Shawn

## Additional Participating Persons:
* John D Kearby; FAA/FSDO; Hapeville, GA
* Tomasz Makowski; Commission of Aircraft Accident Investigation; Warszawa
* Bernhard Kobylik; Austrian Civil Aviation Safety Investigation ; Vienna
* Jordan Paskevich; Rotax - Technical Advisor to Austria; Vernon

## Original Publish Date:
April 27, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88646](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88646)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88646).