# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Roseburg, Oregon

## Date & Time: 
January 26, 2014, 15:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Pitts S2C

## Defining Event:
Collision during takeoff/land

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR14LA114

## Registration:
N102ZT

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

The commercial pilot was conducting a local personal flight. The pilot reported that he entered the traffic pattern behind a much slower airplane and observed a second (high-wing) airplane on an apparent base leg about 1 mile south of the airport. The pilot made a right 360-degree turn while on the downwind leg for spacing. After reestablishing his position on the downwind leg, he requested position reports from local area traffic. The pilot in the first airplane in the traffic pattern reported clear of the runway; the accident pilot heard no other position reports and subsequently began a normal approach to the runway. Immediately before turning to final, the pilot from an unknown airplane transmitted that his airplane was on final for the same runway. The accident pilot then rolled the airplane wings level and checked the final approach path for traffic. He observed no traffic and subsequently rolled the airplane back into a left turn to final with a shallow left forward slip. As the airplane rolled onto short final, it collided with the upper portion of a tall tree. The pilot then landed the airplane successfully.

The Federal Aviation Administration Digital Airport/Facility Directory noted that the runway had a displaced threshold of 371 ft due to a tree, which was also depicted on the airport diagram. It is likely that the pilot lost his orientation with respect to the tree when he diverted his scan to look for another airplane in the traffic pattern.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's loss of orientation while scanning for airport traffic during the turn from the base to final legs of the traffic pattern, which resulted in his failure to maintain clearance from a tree.

---

# Findings

## Personnel issues
Monitoring environment - Pilot

## Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Awareness of condition

## Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Landing | Collision during takeoff/land (Defining event) |

On January 26, 2014, about 1530 Pacific standard time, a Pitts S2C, N102ZT, collided with trees during the turn to final approach to runway 34 at Roseburg, Oregon. The pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The commercial pilot was not injured. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the upper and lower wings. The local personal flight departed Roseburg about 1500. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.

The pilot reported that he returned from a local flight, and entered the traffic pattern behind a much slower airplane. He observed a second (high-wing) airplane crossing from west to east on an apparent base about 1 mile south of the airport. The pilot made a right 360-degree turn on downwind for spacing. He noted that hilly terrain surrounded the airport. After reestablishing his position on downwind, he requested position reports from Roseburg area traffic. The first airplane reported clear of the runway; he heard no other position reports.

The pilot stated that he made a normal approach to the runway. Immediately prior to the turn to final, an unknown airplane transmitted that they were on final for runway 34. The pilot rolled wings level, and checked the final approach path for traffic. He observed none, and rolled back into a left turn to final with a shallow left forward slip. As the airplane rolled onto short final, it collided with the upper portion of a tall tree. The pilot landed the airplane successfully, and egressed from the airplane with no difficulties.

The pilot reported that the tree was about 60 feet higher than a utility pole near it, and encroached into the approach flight path for landing. He also reported that the tree was not lighted.

The FAA Digital Airport/Facility Directory indicated that runway 34 was 4,602 feet long and 100 feet wide. The runway surface was asphalt, and noted a displaced threshold of 371 feet for a tree, which was also depicted on the airport diagram.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Commercial; Flight instructor

## Airplane Rating(s):
* Single-engine land
* Single-engine sea 
* Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Rear

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
Unknown

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
* Airplane multi-engine
* Airplane single-engine

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 2 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
March 6, 2013

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
June 22, 2013

## Flight Time:
* 7918 hours (Total, all aircraft)
* 328 hours (Total, this make and model)
* 7918 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
* 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Pitts

## Registration:
N102ZT

## Model/Series:
S2C

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
2003

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic

## Serial Number:
6057

## Landing Gear Type:
Tailwheel

## Seats:
2

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
October 23, 2013 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1698 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
127 Hrs at time of accident

## Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming

## ELT:
Not installed

## Engine Model/Series:
AEVI-540-O4A5

## Registered Owner:
BSS Arrow LLC

## Rated Power:
260 Horsepower

## Operator:
Dave Leonard

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)
- Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- KRBG
- Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 14:53 Local
- Direction from Accident Site:

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Clear
- Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- None
- Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- / 
- Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
- /

## Wind Direction:
- Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
- /

## Altimeter Setting:
- 30.05 inches Hg
- Temperature/Dew Point: 12°C / 4°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
- No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
- Roseburg, OR (RBG )
- Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR

## Destination:
- Roseburg, OR (RBG )
- Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
- 15:00 Local
- Type of Airspace:

# Airport Information

## Airport:
- Roseburg Regional Airport RBG
- Runway Surface Type: Asphalt

## Airport Elevation:
- 525 ft msl
- Runway Surface Condition: Dry

## Runway Used:
- 34
- IFR Approach: None

## Runway Length/Width:
- 5000 ft / 100 ft
- VFR Approach/Landing: Full stop

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
- 1 None

## Passenger Injuries:

## Ground Injuries:
- N/A

## Total Injuries:
- 1 None

## Aircraft Damage:
- Substantial

## Aircraft Fire:
- None

## Aircraft Explosion:
- None

## Latitude, Longitude:
- 43.238887,-123.355834(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Plagens, Howard

## Additional Participating Persons:
Ian Hansen; FAA FSDO; Hillsboro, OR

## Original Publish Date:
April 26, 2016

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88790](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88790)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.