# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Porterville, California

## Date & Time: 
March 20, 2014, 16:50 Local

## Aircraft:
EVEKTOR-AEROTECHNIK AS SPORTSTAR

## Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Instructional

## Accident Number:
WPR14LA141

## Registration:
N817EV

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

The student pilot reported that, during takeoff, he felt the airplane dip right. When he reduced the throttle and applied brakes, the airplane suddenly spun left and exited the runway. A witness located adjacent to the accident site reported that he observed the airplane veer left during the takeoff, that he heard the engine power reduce, and that he observed the right main landing gear begin to "flip around" as the airplane exited the left side of the runway. Subsequently, the airplane came to rest adjacent to the runway in the opposite direction of the takeoff; the right main landing gear had separated. Postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any preaccident mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. Skid marks observed on the runway were consistent with all three tires skidding left to the edge of the runway before the right main landing gear separated. Recorded weather information revealed that, about 5 minutes after the accident, the wind was about 10 degrees left of the runway heading at 6 knots.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The student pilot's failure to maintain directional control during takeoff.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
Directional control - Not attained/maintained

## Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Student/instructed pilot

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Takeoff | Loss of control on ground (Defining event) |
| Takeoff-rejected takeoff | Part(s) separation from AC |
| Takeoff-rejected takeoff | Runway excursion |
| Takeoff-rejected takeoff | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On March 20, 2014, about 1650 Pacific daylight time, an Evektor-Aerotechnik-AS Sportstar, N817EV, was substantially damaged during takeoff from the Porterville Municipal Airport, Porterville, California. The airplane was registered to and operated by Lighten Up Aviation LLC. under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The student pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local instructional flight. The flight was originating at the time of the accident.

In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge the student reported that during takeoff on runway 30, as the airplane accelerated past about 30 miles per hour, he felt it dip to the right. The pilot stated that when he reduced throttle and applied brakes, the airplane suddenly spun to the left and exited the runway.

A witness, located adjacent to the accident site, reported that he observed the airplane veer to the left and the right wing drop during the takeoff roll. The witness stated that he heard the engine reduce in power, and observed the right main landing gear begin to "flip around" as the airplane exited the left side of the runway. He added that the airplane came to rest adjacent to the runway opposite the direction of takeoff, and that the right main landing gear had separated.

Recorded weather information revealed that about 5 minutes after the accident, wind was from 290 degrees at 6 knots. About 20 minutes after the time of the accident, wind was from 270 degrees at 7 knots.

Postaccident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the right main landing gear was separated and the right wing was bent up slightly about mid-span. The inspector stated that examination of the airplane did not reveal any preexisting mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. The inspector reported that skid marks, consistent with a left skidding turn, were observed on the runway surface.

---

# Student pilot Information

## Certificate: Student
Age: 40

## Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied: Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None
Restraint Used: 3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present: No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None
Toxicology Performed: No

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without waivers/limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam: November 13, 2013

## Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:

## Flight Time:
23 hours (Total, all aircraft), 23 hours (Total, this make and model), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
EVEKTOR-AEROTECHNIK AS
Registration: N817EV

## Model/Series:
SPORTSTAR NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
2007
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Special light-sport (Special)
Serial Number: 20070817

## Landing Gear Type:
Tricycle
Seats: 2

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
September 28, 2013 100 hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 1320 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
40 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
680 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: Rotax

## ELT:
Engine Model/Series: 912ULS

## Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power: 100 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)
- Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- KPTV, 442 ft msl
- Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 23:55 Local
- Direction from Accident Site: 235°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Clear
- Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- None
- Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- 6 knots /
- Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:

## Wind Direction:
- 290°
- Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:

## Altimeter Setting:
- 29.89 inches Hg
- Temperature/Dew Point: 26°C / 1°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
- No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
- Porterville, CA (PTV)
- Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination:
- Porterville, CA (PTV)
- Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time:
- Type of Airspace:

# Airport Information

## Airport:
- PORTERVILLE MUNI PTV
- Runway Surface Type: Asphalt

## Airport Elevation:
- 443 ft msl
- Runway Surface Condition: Dry

## Runway Used:
- 30
- IFR Approach: None

## Runway Length/Width:
- 5960 ft / 150 ft
- VFR Approach/Landing: None

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
- 1 None

## Passenger Injuries:
- Aircraft Fire: None

## Ground Injuries:
- N/A
- Aircraft Explosion: None

## Total Injuries:
- 1 None
- Latitude, Longitude: 36.030834,-119.059722(est)

## Aircraft Damage:
- Substantial

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Cawthra, Joshua

## Additional Participating Persons:
David Gage, Federal Aviation Administration; Fresno, CA

## Original Publish Date:
November 3, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88946](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=88946)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.