# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Newport, Vermont

## Date & Time: 
June 7, 2014, 17:00 Local

## Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-140

## Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
ERA14LA285

## Registration:
N5169T

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 None

## Analysis

The pilot was returning to his home airport after a local flight that lasted about 2 hours. On his first attempted landing, the pilot conducted a go-around. The pilot said that he was "high and fast" on the second attempt, even though the runway was equipped with a 2-light precision approach path indicator which would have given the pilot guidance to touch down with the first one-third of the runway. The airplane touched down about 3,000 feet down the 3,998-foot runway. The pilot then applied full power to abort the landing. After lifting off, the airplane pitched up, and, according to the pilot, the engine failed. About 200 feet above ground level, the airplane banked left and settled back toward the ground; it then impacted the ground and slid to a stop about 850 feet off the end of the runway. Immediately after the accident, the pilot exited the wreckage and was observed leaving the airport.

A postaccident examination and test run of the engine revealed no evidence of any anomalies that would have precluded normal engine operation. According to a witness, on the morning of the accident, she observed the pilot consume 12 to 16 alcoholic beverages between 0745 and 1230 when the pilot left to meet his passenger for the flight. After the accident, the Vermont State Police made contact with the pilot at his residence, where he refused a breathalyzer test. Given the airplane's performance during and after the pitch up, and the absence of any indications of an engine anomaly, the airplane likely entered an aerodynamic stall; the pilot's failure to adequately maintain airspeed and pitch control after the aborted landing, which resulted in the stall, was likely related to his consumption of alcohol.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

---

# Findings

| Aircraft | Airspeed - Not attained/maintained |
| --- | --- |
| Personnel issues | Incorrect action performance - Pilot |
| Personnel issues | Alcohol - Pilot |

The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during an aborted landing, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall and collision with the ground. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's alcohol impairment.

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Landing-aborted after touchdown | Abrupt maneuver |
| Initial climb | Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event) |
| Uncontrolled descent | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On June 7, 2014, at approximately 1700 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-140, N5169T, was substantially damaged during a balked landing at Newport State Airport (EFK), Newport, Vermont. The private pilot and pilot rated passenger were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight, conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.

According to the pilot, he first attempted a landing which resulted in him having to execute a go-around. During his second attempted landing he stated that on final approach he was "too high and fast." During the landing flare, the airplane floated in ground effect, and touched down approximately 3,000 feet down the runway. The pilot then applied full power to abort the landing. The pilot stated at approximately 900 feet agl the engine lost all power.

According to the passenger he was not at the controls of the aircraft during the final landing. Mr. Booth stated that the he did not remember the engine failing during the accident sequence. He also said that Mr. Quirion told Mr. Booth before the flight that he would assume the pilot in command responsibilities since he was the one who owned the airplane. Mr. Booth also confirmed that Mr. Quirion had left the scene of the accident immediately after the crash. Mr. Booth could not confirm that Mr. Quirion had consumed any alcohol prior to the flight.

Immediately after the accident the pilot exited the wreckage was observed leaving the airport.

According to a witness, the airplane pitched up abruptly, and climbed to an altitude of approximately 200 feet above ground level (agl). The airplane then banked left and settled back towards the ground. The airplane subsequently impacted terrain north of the departure end of runway 36. The witness also stated that the engine was running up to the point of impact.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Private

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Medical Certification:
None

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Flight Time:
604 hours (Total, all aircraft), 525 hours (Total, this make and model), 550 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)

# Pilot-rated passenger Information

## Certificate:
Private

## Airplane Rating(s): 
Single-engine land

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 None

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Flight Time:
October 1, 2012

According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and pilot records the pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land. At the time of the accident he did not possess an FAA medical certificate. The pilot reported that he had accrued 604 hours of total flight experience, of which 525 were in the accident airplane make and model.

According to FAA records the pilot rated passenger held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land. He received a third class medical October 1, 2012.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Piper
Registration: N5169T

## Model/Series: PA-28-140
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 1972
Amateur Built: 

Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 28-7225348

Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats:

Date/Type of Last Inspection:
Certified Max Gross Wt.:

Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time: Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: 0-320 SERIES

Registered Owner: On file
Rated Power: 140 Horsepower

Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

According to the FAA, the airplane was issued a standard airworthiness certificate on May 1, 1972. The airplane was purchased by the pilot on February 22, 2006.

The airplane's registration had expired on May 31, 2014, approximately 7 days prior to the accident.

Despite requests by the FAA and NTSB, no maintenance records were provided by the pilot/owner. A review of FAA airworthiness records indicated as of April 1, 1992 the airplane had accrued 3,183 total hours of operation.

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Visual (VMC) | - |
| Condition of Light | Day |
| Observation Facility, Elevation | EFK,930 ft msl |
| Distance from Accident Site | 0 Nautical Miles |
| Observation Time | 16:55 Local |
| Direction from Accident Site | 0° |
| Lowest Cloud Condition | Scattered / 7500 ft AGL |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Lowest Ceiling | - |
| Visibility (RVR) | - |
| Wind Speed/Gusts | 7 knots / |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual | / None |
| Wind Direction | 300° |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual | / N/A |
| Altimeter Setting | 29.95 inches Hg |
| Temperature/Dew Point | 24°C / 10°C |
| Precipitation and Obscuration | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point | Newport, VT (EFK ) |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed | None |
| Destination | Newport, VT (EFK ) |
| Type of Clearance | None |
| Departure Time | Type of Airspace: Class G |

At 2055 the ecorded weather at EFK included, wind 300 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, scattered clouds at 7,500 feet, temperature 24 C, dewpoint 10 C, and altimeter setting of 29.95 inches of mercury.

# Airport Information

| Airport | Newport State EFK |
| --- | --- |
| Airport Elevation | 930 ft msl |
| Runway Used | 36 |
| Runway Length/Width | 3998 ft / 100 ft |
| Runway Surface Type | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition | Dry |
| IFR Approach | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing | Go around;Traffic pattern |

According to the airport facility directory, EFK was a publically owned, non-towered airport with an elevation of about 930 feet above mean sea level.

Runway 36 was asphalt and was 3,998 feet long and 100 feet wide. The gradient for the runway was .3 percent.

A 2-light precision approach path indicator existed on the left side of the runway which indicated a 4-degree glidepath to touchdown.

Obstacles existed at the departure end of the runway in the form of 70 foot tall trees, which were located 959 feet from the end of the runway and 475 feet left of centerline. They required an 11:1 slope to clear.

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
* 1 None

## Passenger Injuries:
* 1 None

## Ground Injuries: 
* N/A

## Total Injuries:
* 2 None

## Aircraft Damage:
* Substantial

## Aircraft Fire:
* None

## Aircraft Explosion:
* None

## Latitude, Longitude:
* 44.88639,-72.224166

The airplane came to rest upright in a field approximately 850 feet off the end of runway 36. Examination of the accident site revealed multiple propeller strike marks in the ground leading up to the main wreckage.

During examination of the wreckage, no evidence of any preimpact failures or malfunctions of the airplane were discovered.

Examination of the wreckage revealed that the nose landing gear and right main landing gear had collapsed and the left main landing gear had separated from the airplane. The airplane's fuselage structure was substantially damaged.

The propeller of the aircraft exhibited evidence of rotation. The propeller tips were twisted and exhibited chordwise scratching.

Examination of the engine revealed there was no evidence of any preimpact failures or malfunctions that would have precluded normal engine operation. A cold engine compression check was conducted and no anomalies were found. The damaged propeller was replaced and an engine start and run-up was conducted using the same fuel that was onboard the airplane at the time of the accident. The engine was first run at 1500 RPM for approximately 3 minutes and was then shut down. A second startup was conducted and the engine power was subsequently increased to 2300 RPM. At that time the power was reduced to 2100 RPM and a magneto check was conducted and no anomalies were noted.

## Additional Information

According to a witness, on the morning of the accident she observed the pilot consume 12 to 16 alcoholic beverages between 0745 and 1230, then the pilot left to meet his passenger for the flight.

According to an FAA inspector, after the accident the Vermont State Police made contact with the pilot at his residence where he refused a breathalyzer test.

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Gunther, Todd

## Additional Participating Persons:
Fred King; FAA FSDO, Portland, ME

## Original Publish Date:
October 27, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89406](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89406)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.