# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Santa Monica, California

## Date & Time: 
April 18, 2014, 13:40 Local

## Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas Helicopter 500N

## Defining Event:
Landing gear collapse

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR14LA253

## Registration:
N522GS

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
4 None

## Analysis

The private pilot/owner of the helicopter was conducting a local personal flight. The pilot reported that, upon landing, he slowly sat the helicopter down on a landing pad and then felt it "drastically" slip to the right. He then lifted the helicopter off the pad, at which time a passenger verified that the right aft landing gear strut was broken. A passenger reported that, upon touchdown, he heard a "loud pop."

The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had previously issued an airworthiness directive (AD) applicable to the accident helicopter make and model to detect cracks that could result in the failure of the strut and subsequent loss of helicopter control during landing. The AD required modifications to the landing gear strut rivet holes and fairings and subsequent initial dye penetrant inspections followed by continuing 10x magnified visual inspections at intervals not to exceed every 100 hours time in service or during each annual inspection. According to the FAA, the AD was complied with at an airframe total time of 2,248.3 hours. At the time of the accident, the total airframe time was 2,274 hours.

Examination of the right aft landing gear strut revealed that it had fractured due to undetected fatigue cracking in an inboard rivet hole. The fatigue cracks were very small, and given their size, they likely would not have been detectible by the existing required visual inspections. The cracks initiated after the rivet hole diameter was increased; therefore, they initiated after the initial penetrant inspection.

Although it is possible that the fatigue cracks were the result of a degradation in material properties or, more likely, due to greater loads from a previous hard landing or normal landing on primarily the right skid, the investigation was not able to determine the origin of the fatigue cracks based on the available information.

## Probable Cause and Findings

---

# The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The fracture of the right aft landing gear strut due to undetected fatigue cracking in an inboard rivet hole.

## Findings

| Aircraft | Main gear strut/axle/truck - Fatigue/wear/corrosion |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft | Main gear strut/axle/truck - Failure |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Landing | Landing gear collapse (Defining event) |
| --- | --- |

### HISTORY OF FLIGHT

On April 18, 2014, about 1340 Pacific daylight time (PDT), a McDonnell Douglas Helicopter (MDHI) 500N, N522GS, right rear landing gear strut failed during landing, and while attempting to set the helicopter on the ground, the front strut also collapsed at Santa Monica Airport (SMO), Santa Monica, California. The owner/pilot was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The private pilot and three passengers were not injured; the helicopter sustained substantial damage to the front landing gear structure. The local personal flight departed Camarillo, California, about 1315, with a planned destination of Santa Monica. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.

The pilot reported that on landing he slowly sat the helicopter down on a landing pad and felt the helicopter "drastically" slip to the right. He then lifted the helicopter off the pad at which time a passenger on board verified the right strut was broken. A passenger reported that on touchdown he heard a "loud pop."

### AIRCRAFT AND AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVE

The 1993 McDonnell Douglas 500N helicopter was subject to Airworthiness Directive (AD) 2007-12-23, requiring modifications to the strut and fairings and continuing inspections. The AD references MD Helicopter Service Bulletin SB500N-022 that describes the modifications. The increased size of the rivet hole and the polished surface around the hole suggest that the modifications had been performed. The AD required an initial dye penetrant inspection followed by continuing 10x magnified visual inspections at intervals not to exceed every 100 hours time in service or during each annual inspection. According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), AD 2007-12-23 was complied with at a airframe total time of 2,248.3; at the time of the accident the a total airframe time of 2,274 was reported. The FAA notes that there were no dates on the record for the AD compliance and it was assumed that the AD was complied with during the aircraft 100/annual inspection, which was performed in December 2013, according to maintenance records.

### TESTS AND RESEARCH

Magnified visual examinations of the fracture surfaces by a National Transportation Safety Board materials specialist uncovered faceted features and arrest marks consistent with fatigue cracking on both sides of the inboard holes. The remaining fracture area was matte gray and highly textured consistent with overstress separation. The fatigue appeared to initiate at multiple origins on opposite sides of the hole bore. The fatigue cracks propagated circumferentially short distances into the strut wall with

---

# Accident Details

## Strut Examination

Slightly greater penetrations adjacent to the outer diameter of the strut. Visually, the fatigue measured about 0.043 inch (aft) and 0.054 inch (forward) at the outer surface of the strut.

About 1.5 inches above the fracture, the outer diameter of the strut measured approximately 2.368 to 2.374 inches with an inner diameter measuring 1.998 to 1.999 inches. The inner and outer diameters were not concentric consistent with the engineering drawing. The wall thickness measured about 0.167 inches thick at the inboard location above the fracture.

Engineering representatives of the manufacturer stated that the material was specified as aluminum alloy AA1 7075 in the T73 temper condition per AMS-A-227712. X-ray fluorescent spectroscopy 3 confirmed the composition as consistent with aluminum alloy 7075. For further information see the NTSB Material Lab Factual Report in the docket for this accident.

# Pilot Information

| | |
|-|-|
| Certificate: | Private |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | Helicopter |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: | Class 3 With waivers/limitations |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Flight Time: | 2110 hours (Total, all aircraft), 368.5 hours (Total, this make and model), 32 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

| | |
|-|-|
| Age: | 64,Male |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Restraint Used: | 4-point |
| Second Pilot Present: | No |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | May 9, 2014 |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | May 8, 2012 |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: 
McDonnell Douglas Helicopter

## Registration:
N522GS

## Model/Series:
500N

## Aircraft Category:
Helicopter

## Year of Manufacture:
1993

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
LN056

## Landing Gear Type:
High skid

## Seats:
5

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
December 16, 2013 100 hour

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3350 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Turbo shaft

## Airframe Total Time:
2274 Hrs at time of accident

## Engine Manufacturer:
ROLLS ROYCE

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
250C20RZ

## Registered Owner:
V & A AVIATION LLC

## Rated Power:
450

## Operator:
V & A AVIATION LLC

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSMO,175 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
20:51 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
109°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3500 ft AGL

## Visibility
10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 12°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
CAMARILLO, CA (CMA )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
Santa Monica, CA (SMO )

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Departure Time:
12:50 Local

## Type of Airspace:
Class D

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | SANTA MONICA MUNI SMO |
| Airport Elevation: | 177 ft msl |
| Runway Used: |  |
| Runway Length/Width: |  |
| Runway Surface Type: | Metal/wood |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Traffic pattern |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: | 3 None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 4 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 34.016109,-118.451385 |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jones, Patrick

## Additional Participating Persons:
Steve Sonneson; Federal Aviation Administration; Los Angeles, CA

## Original Publish Date:
September 14, 2016

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89491](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89491)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/aviation.aspx).