# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Orlando, Florida

## Date & Time: 
June 29, 2014, 15:35 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna 172S

## Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Instructional

## Accident Number:
ERA14CA317

## Registration:
N775SP

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
2 Minor

## Analysis

The flight instructor reported that he had completed an approximate 1 hour flight with his student pilot and they landed uneventfully. After landing, the airplane had a long taxi to return to the fixed based operator. During the taxi, a thunderstorm moved into the area and the wind increased. The strong wind caused the airplane to weathervane violently in one direction. The wind then lifted the airplane, flipped it over, and it came to rest inverted on the taxiway. The pilot added that there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions with the airplane. Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed damage to the fuselage, wings, rudder, and horizontal stabilizer. The recorded wind at the airport at the time of the accident was from 120 degrees at 10 knots, gusting to 31 knots.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight instructor's failure to maintain control while taxiing in a strong gusty wind.

## Findings

| | |
|-|-|
| Personnel issues | Aircraft control - Instructor/check pilot |
| Aircraft (general) | Not attained/maintained |
| Environmental issues | Gusts - Effect on operation |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Taxi-from runway | Windshear or thunderstorm |
| Taxi-from runway | Loss of control on ground (Defining event) |
| Taxi-from runway | Nose over/nose down |
| Taxi-from runway | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

## Flight instructor Information

| Certificate: | Commercial; Flight instructor |
| Age: | 24 |
| Airplane Rating(s): | Single-engine land; Multi-engine land |
| Seat Occupied: | Right |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: | 3-point |
| Instrument Rating(s): | Airplane |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | Airplane multi-engine; Airplane single-engine; Instrument airplane |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | Class 1 Without waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: | July 18, 2013 |
| Occupational Pilot: | Yes |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: | June 25, 2013 |
| Flight Time: | 1614 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1024 hours (Total, this make and model), 1513 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 88 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

## Student pilot Information

| Certificate: | None |
| Age: | 47 |
| Airplane Rating(s): | None |
| Seat Occupied: | Left |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Restraint Used: | 3-point |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Medical Certification: | None |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Flight Time: | 9 hours (Total, all aircraft), 9 hours (Total, this make and model) |

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Cessna
Registration: N775SP

## Model/Series: 172S
Aircraft Category: Airplane

## Year of Manufacture: 2001
Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 172S8705

## Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
June 4, 2014 100 hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2558 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection: 22 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time: 7088 Hrs as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

## ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: IO360 SER

## Registered Owner: SCHARF AVIATION INC
Rated Power: 180 Horsepower

## Operator: Trax Air
Operating Certificate(s) Held: Pilot school (141)

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation: ORL,113 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time: 15:34 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 0°

## Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 1300 ft AGL
Visibility 1 miles

## Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 5500 ft AGL
Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts: 10 knots / 31 knots
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:  / None

## Wind Direction: 120°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:  / N/A

## Altimeter Setting: 30.06 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 27°C / 19°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration: N/A - Thunderstorm - Rain

## Departure Point: Orlando, FL (ORL )
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

## Destination: Orlando, FL (ORL )
Type of Clearance: None

## Departure Time: 14:30 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Orlando Executive Airport ORL |
| Airport Elevation: | 113 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | IFR Approach: None |
| Runway Length/Width: | VFR Approach/Landing: None |
| Runway Surface Type: | |
| Runway Surface Condition: | |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 2 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: | |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 2 Minor |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 28.545555,-81.333053(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Gretz, Robert

## Additional Participating Persons:
Cory E Best; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL

## Original Publish Date:
September 2, 2014

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89563](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89563)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89563).