# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
San Antonio, Texas

## Date & Time: 
August 9, 2014, 07:34 Local

## Aircraft:
Bombardier CL600 2D24 - 900

## Defining Event:
Ground collision

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air carrier - Scheduled

## Accident Number:
CEN14LA430

## Registration:
N943LR

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
80 None

## Analysis

During pushback from the gate, the tug positioned the airplane on the taxiway. Before disconnecting, the tug reversed and the airplane rolled forward while still attached to the tug. As the airplane rolled past the tug, the tug impacted the left side of the fuselage. The tow bar pin was found sheared, but it could not be determined if the pin failed before or during the tow operation. Further, the operator did not have an immediate means of communicating with the flight crew the need to apply the brakes while the tug was still attached.

The tug operator's postaccident urine test was positive for marijuana, which indicated prior use. However, it could not be determined whether the tug operator was impaired by the effects of marijuana at the time of the event.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

Failure of the tow bar shear pin, which resulted in the tug operator's loss of control of the airplane during pushback operations. Contributing to the accident was the tug operator's inability to communicate to the flight crew to apply the airplane's brakes.

---

# Findings

## Personnel issues
* Use of equip/system - Ground crew
* Lack of communication - Ground crew

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Pushback/towing | Ground collision (Defining event) |
| --- | --- |

On August 9, 2014, about 0735 central daylight time (CDT), a Bombardier CL600 airplane, N943LR, collided with a tug during pushback from the gate at San Antonio International Airport (SAT) San Antonio, Texas. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage structure and internal damage to nose landing gear. The airplane was registered to and operated by Mesa Airlines Inc. as US Airways flight 2763. The four flight crewmembers and passengers on-board were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and the flight operated on a instrument flight rules flight plan. The scheduled, domestic passenger flight was operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121. The flight was destined for Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX), Phoenix, Arizona.

The first officer reported the tug driver did not have an operable headset and the pushback was initiated using hand signals. The airplane was positioned on the ramp at a 90-degree angle to the gate. The tug driver stated after turning the airplane onto the taxiway he "reversed back," pulling the airplane forward. The tug stopped perpendicular to the left nose of the airplane, but the airplane continued to roll forward while still attached to the tow bar. The airplane rolled into the tug impacting the left side of the fuselage.

Examination revealed the tow bar shear pin had failed, but the investigation could not determine if the shear pin failed prior to or during the pushback process.

In accordance with company policies and procedures, a postaccident drug test of the tug driver was administered about 9 hours after the accident, which was positive for marijuana. According to 49 CFR Part 40 Section 40.87, the initial test cut off is 50 ng/ml, but a positive marijuana test can be reported if the confirmatory test identifies 15 ng/ml or more of marijuana metabolite (tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid, or THC-COOH) in urine. According to the NTSB Medical Officer, about 30% of THC is eventually excreted in urine, primarily as THC-COOH. However, its presence in urine only indicates prior THC exposure. After smoking marijuana, it can take as long as four hours for THC-COOH to appear in the urine at concentrations above the initial reporting cut off of 50 ng/ml. Positive urine test results generally indicate use within hours to a few days; however, the detection window can be significantly longer following chronic, heavy use.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate:
Airline transport; Commercial

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 1 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
May 6, 2014

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
February 9, 2014

## Flight Time:
(Estimated) 11454 hours (Total, all aircraft), 10871 hours (Total, this make and model), 11381 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 238 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 72 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

# Co-pilot Information

## Certificate:
Airline transport; Commercial

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Right

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
March 27, 2014

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
October 9, 2013

## Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1864 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1864 hours (Total, this make and model), 208 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 64 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)

# Other flight crew Information

## Certificate:
None

## Airplane Rating(s):
None

## Seat Occupied:
Rear

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
5-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
Yes

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:

## Flight Time:

---

# Other flight crew Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Certificate: | None |
| Airplane Rating(s): | None |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s): | None |
| Instrument Rating(s): | None |
| Instructor Rating(s): | None |
| Medical Certification: |  |
| Occupational Pilot: | No |
| Flight Time: |  |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Age: |  |
| Seat Occupied: | Front |
| Restraint Used: |  |
| Second Pilot Present: | Yes |
| Toxicology Performed: | No |
| Last FAA Medical Exam: |  |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent: |  |

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Make: | Bombardier |
| Model/Series: | CL600 2D24 - 900 |
| Year of Manufacture: | 2006 |
| Airworthiness Certificate: | Transport |
| Landing Gear Type: | Retractable - Tricycle |
| Date/Type of Last Inspection: | June 26, 2014 Continuous airworthiness |
| Time Since Last Inspection: | 12283 Hrs at time of accident |
| Airframe Total Time: |  |
| ELT: | C126 installed, not activated |
| Registered Owner: | MESA AIRLINES INC |
| Operator: | MESA AIRLINES INC |
| Operator Does Business As: | American Eagle |

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Registration: | N943LR |
| Aircraft Category: | Airplane |
| Amateur Built: |  |
| Serial Number: | 15068 |
| Seats: | 80 |
| Certified Max Gross Wt.: | 82060 lbs |
| Engines: | 2 Turbo fan |
| Engine Manufacturer: | General Electric |
| Engine Model/Series: | CF34-8C5 |
| Rated Power: | 14500 Lbs thrust |
| Operating Certificate(s) Held: | Flag carrier (121), Supplemental |
| Operator Designator Code: | SIMA |

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
- Visual (VMC)
- Condition of Light: Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
- KSAT,789 ft msl
- Distance from Accident Site: 1 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
- 12:51 Local
- Direction from Accident Site: 328°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
- Few / 1700 ft AGL
- Visibility: 10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
- Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
- 5 knots /
- Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / None

## Wind Direction:
- 180°
- Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / N/A

## Altimeter Setting:
- 30.02 inches Hg
- Temperature/Dew Point: 26°C / 22°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
- No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
- San Antonio, TX (SAT )
- Type of Flight Plan Filed: IFR

## Destination:
- PHOENIX, AZ (PHX )
- Type of Clearance: IFR

## Departure Time:
- Type of Airspace: Class C

# Airport Information

## Airport:
- SAN ANTONIO INTL SAT
- Runway Surface Type:
- Runway Surface Condition:

## Airport Elevation:
- 809 ft msl
- IFR Approach: None
- VFR Approach/Landing: None

## Runway Used:

# Wreckage and Impact Information

## Crew Injuries:
- 4 None
- Aircraft Damage: Substantial

## Passenger Injuries:
- 76 None
- Aircraft Fire: None

## Ground Injuries:
- N/A
- Aircraft Explosion: None

## Total Injuries:
- 80 None
- Latitude, Longitude: 29.526945,-98.471946(est)

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Liedler, Courtney

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Thomas C Fowles; Federal Aviation Administration; San Antonio, TX
* Mary Pat McKay; NTSB; Washington, DC

## Original Publish Date:
August 28, 2017

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89879](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89879)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.