# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Bridgeport, Texas

## Date & Time: 
July 29, 2014, 13:05 Local

## Aircraft:
SUTTON WILLIAM J STITS PLAYMATE SA11A

## Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN14LA433

## Registration:
N76WS

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

After refueling the airplane, the pilot observed that the wind direction at the airport had changed about 90 degrees from when he had arrived about 30 minutes earlier. The pilot reported that the wind was now 8 to 10 mph and varying from 050 to 090 degrees, so he chose runway 36 for departure. When the airplane was about 10 to 15 ft above the ground, it made a descending left turn. The pilot stayed in the traffic pattern and then landed on the runway. The pilot checked the flight controls, and they appeared to respond correctly. He departed again, and, after becoming airborne, the airplane made another descending left turn. The airplane did not respond to the pilot's control inputs, so he reduced power and landed in the grass near the runway. The airplane slid across a taxiway and impacted a tree and fence at the airport perimeter. Aileron control continuity was established with no abnormalities noted. The airport's automated weather reporting station reported calm wind and lightning in the distance south of the airport about the time of departure. Based on the events, it's likely that, during the takeoff, the airplane encountered rapidly changing wind conditions due to a nearby storm.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The pilot's loss of airplane control during takeoff after encountering rapidly changing wind conditions.

---

# Findings

## Environmental issues
Sudden wind shift - Contributed to outcome

## Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot

## Aircraft
Lateral/bank control - Not attained/maintained

## Environmental issues
Fence/fence post - Contributed to outcome

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| Takeoff | Windshear or thunderstorm |
| Takeoff | Loss of control in flight (Defining event) |
| Uncontrolled descent | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |

On July 29, 2014, about 1305 central daylight time, a Stits Playmate SA11A airplane, N76WS, impacted terrain at the Bridgeport Municipal Airport (XBP), Bridgeport, Texas. The airline transport rated pilot was not injured and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed. The flight was departing XBP at the time of the accident.

The pilot departed from an airport located about 25 miles southeast of XBP earlier, and the wind was 8-10 mph from 150 degrees. As he approached his destination airport, he observed the winds to be 8-10 mph from 150-170 degrees, and then conducted a normal landing on runway 18. After refueling the airplane and about 30 minutes after arriving, he planned to return to his original airport. He noticed the winds were now 8-10 mph and varying from 050 to 090 degrees. The pilot then selected runway 36 for departure. During the takeoff, when the airplane was 10-15 feet in the air, the airplane made a descending left turn. He then stayed in the traffic pattern and landed on the runway. The pilot checked the flight controls and the controls appeared to respond correctly. He departed the airport and after becoming airborne, the airplane made another descending left turn. The airplane did not respond to his control inputs, so he reduced power and landed in the grass near the runway. The airplane slid across a taxiway and impacted a tree and fence, at the airport perimeter.

Examination of the airplane by the NTSB Investigator revealed substantial damage to the left and right wings, and fuselage. Control continuity of the ailerons was established with no abnormalities noted. The airplane's last annual condition inspection was completed on May 3, 2014, with an airplane total time of 409 hours. The pilot reported 2,790 total flight hours with 75 hours in the accident airplane.

The automated weather reporting station located at XBP, at 1255 recorded calm winds, with lightning in the distance, south of the airport.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Airline transport

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
Airplane multi-engine; Airplane single-engine; Helicopter; Instrument airplane; Instrument helicopter

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
November 20, 2012

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
October 22, 2014

## Flight Time:
2790 hours (Total, all aircraft), 75 hours (Total, this make and model), 1860 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
SUTTON WILLIAM J

## Registration:
N76WS

## Model/Series:
STITS PLAYMATE SA11A

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
1975

## Amateur Built:
Yes

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental (Special)

## Serial Number:
75

## Landing Gear Type:
Unknown

## Seats:

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
May 3, 2014 Condition

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
409 Hrs at time of accident

## Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming

## ELT:
Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident

## Engine Model/Series:
O-290D

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Visual (VMC) | Condition of Light: Day |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | KXBP | Distance from Accident Site: |
| Observation Time: | 12:55 Local | Direction from Accident Site: |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Scattered / 8000 ft AGL | Visibility | 10 miles |
| Lowest Ceiling: | Broken / 9000 ft AGL | Visibility (RVR): |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: |  / | Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Wind Direction: | Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Altimeter Setting: | 30.2 inches Hg | Temperature/Dew Point: | 22°C / 16°C |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | In the vicinity - Thunderstorm - |
| Departure Point: | Bridgeport, TX (KXBP) | Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Destination: | Hicks Airfield, TX (T67 ) | Type of Clearance: | None |
| Departure Time: | 13:05 Local | Type of Airspace: |

# Airport Information

| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Bridgeport Municipal KXBP | Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Airport Elevation: | 852 ft msl | Runway Surface Condition: | Wet |
| Runway Used: | 36 | IFR Approach: | None |
| Runway Length/Width: | 4004 ft / 60 ft | VFR Approach/Landing: | None |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Item | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None | Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Passenger Injuries: | | Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A | Aircraft Explosion: | Unknown |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None | Latitude, Longitude: | 33.173332,-97.82917 |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Hatch, Craig

## Additional Participating Persons:
Morris McAlister; FAA FSDO; Dallas, TX

## Original Publish Date:
March 26, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89888](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89888)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.