# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Pahrump, Nevada

## Date & Time: 
August 24, 2014, 06:50 Local

## Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY R44 II

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR14LA353

## Registration:
N4246Z

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 Minor

## Analysis

The commercial pilot reported that, during a practice autorotation, a total loss of engine power occurred about 3,500 ft above ground level. The pilot made several unsuccessful attempts to restart the engine, and he subsequently performed an autorotation emergency landing. During the landing, the helicopter slid forward about 20 ft, the skids dug into the dry lakebed, and the helicopter then nosed over. Subsequently, the main rotor blades impacted the ground, and the helicopter came to rest on its side.

A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The engine was test run at various power settings with no anomalies noted.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A total loss of engine power during a practice autorotation for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.

---

# Findings

## Not determined
(general) - Unknown/Not determined

## Environmental issues
Soft surface - Contributed to outcome

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
|-|-|
| Autorotation | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Landing-landing roll | Nose over/nose down |

On August 24, 2014, about 0650 Pacific daylight time, a Robinson Helicopter Company, R-44 II, N4246Z, sustained substantial damage while practicing an emergency autorotation, about 12 miles south of Pahrump, Nevada. The helicopter was registered to CSC Trust Company of Delaware Trustee and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight that departed North Las Vegas Airport (VGT), Las Vegas, Nevada, about 0605.

The pilot reported a total loss of engine power at about 3,500 feet, above ground level, while rolling the throttle back for a practice autorotation. He stated the throttle was rolled back smoothly and only enough required for a small tachometer needle separation. Subsequently, the pilot made several unsuccessful attempts to restart the engine. Unable to restart the engine, the pilot performed an autorotation emergency landing. The pilot further reported that during landing, the helicopter slid forward about 20 feet; at that point, the skids dug into the dry lake bed and the helicopter nosed over. Subsequently, the main rotor blades impacted the ground, and the helicopter rolled onto its right side.

Examination of the helicopter wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the main rotor blades and tail boom were substantially damaged. Additionally, fuel was observed leaking from both tanks at the site. According to the pilot, the fuel tank quantities were about 7/8's full just prior to the accident. The helicopter was recovered to a secure storage facility for further examination.

Further examination of the helicopter by the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge and a Robinson Helicopter investigator revealed no evidence of any internal damage to the fuel injected engine or its accessories was observed. The oil dipstick reading indicated a normal quantity. Continuity with all the engine controls was established. The lower spark plugs were removed and examined and all sparkplug electrodes exhibited normal wear signatures when compared to the Champion Check-A-Plug comparison chart. The crankshaft was rotated by hand and compression was obtained on all the cylinders. It was determined that an engine run could be safety accomplished.

The engine was subsequently test run, using an external battery source for electrical power, and functioned normally at various power setting. The magnetos were switched from left to right and the corresponding RPM drop was observed during the run. Fuel from the helicopter was used to ensure system continuity. The main fuel tank quantity indicated about 3/8's full and the auxiliary tank about 1/4 full. No engine anomalies were observed during the engine run.

---

# Pilot Information

## Pilot Information

| Certificate | Commercial; Flight instructor |
| --- | --- |
| Age | 55,Male |
| Airplane Rating(s) | None |
| Seat Occupied | Right |
| Other Aircraft Rating(s) | Helicopter |
| Restraint Used | 3-point |
| Instrument Rating(s) | Helicopter |
| Second Pilot Present | No |
| Instructor Rating(s) | Helicopter; Instrument helicopter |
| Toxicology Performed | No |
| Medical Certification | Class 2 With waivers/limitations |
| Last FAA Medical Exam | August 18, 2014 |
| Occupational Pilot | Yes |
| Last Flight Review or Equivalent | May 6, 2014 |
| Flight Time | (Estimated) 2296 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1790 hours (Total, this make and model), 2247 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 111 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft) |

The helicopter's main gear box and drive system were examined and no anomalies were noted. Flight control continuity was established with the cyclic and collective. Tail rotor continuity was established in each direction from the separation point.

A review of the helicopter's maintenance records revealed that the engine and airframe underwent their most recent annual inspection on December 04, 2013, at an airframe and engine total time of 444.3 hours.

A Global Positioning System device was located in the wreckage and sent to the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Division for examination and readout. The device did not contain any specific information relevant to the accident.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY

## Registration:
N4246Z

## Model/Series:
R44 II II

## Aircraft Category:
Helicopter

## Year of Manufacture:
2009

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
12697

## Landing Gear Type:
N/A; Skid

## Seats:
4

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
December 4, 2013 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
444.3 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING

## ELT:
Installed, not activated

## Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-AE1A5

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
360 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual (VMC)

## Condition of Light:
Day

## Observation Facility, Elevation:
DRA,3314 ft msl

## Distance from Accident Site:
45 Nautical Miles

## Observation Time:
05:52 Local

## Direction from Accident Site:
355°

## Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear

## Visibility
10 miles

## Lowest Ceiling:
None

## Visibility (RVR):

## Wind Speed/Gusts:
 / 

## Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual:
 / None

## Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual:
 / 

## Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg

## Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 3°C

## Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation

## Departure Point:
LAS VEGAS, NV (VGT )

## Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None

## Destination:
LAS VEGAS, NV (VGT )

## Type of Clearance:
None

## Departure Time:
06:05 Local

## Type of Airspace:
Class G

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: | - |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 36.218055,-116.175277(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Nixon, Albert

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Paul Alukonis; Federal Aviation Administration; Las Vegas, NV
* Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA

## Original Publish Date:
November 29, 2016

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89936](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=89936)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](here).