# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Lincoln, California

## Date & Time: 
October 5, 2014, 12:15 Local

## Aircraft:
CORBEN BABY ACE D

## Defining Event:
Nose over/nose down

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
WPR15LA003

## Registration:
N3RH

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

Following an uneventful takeoff and straight-out departure, the pilot leveled the airplane about 1,000 ft above ground level, at which point, the engine began to sputter, and it subsequently lost power. The pilot initiated a return to the departure airport; however, due to the low altitude, he initiated a forced landing to a nearby field. During the landing, the main landing gear collapsed, and the airplane nosed over. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the gascolator screen and fuel outlet port were partially restricted with red, sandlike debris, which would have restricted the fuel flow to the carburetor and led to the loss of engine power.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The total loss of engine power due to fuel starvation, which resulted from debris restricting the fuel flow within the fuel system.

## Findings

| | |
|-|-|
| Aircraft | Fuel filter-strainer - Capability exceeded |
| Aircraft | Fuel - Fluid level |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (total) |
| Landing-landing roll | Off-field or emergency landing |
| Landing-landing roll | Nose over/nose down (Defining event) |

On October 5, 2014, about 1215 Pacific daylight time, an experimental amateur built Corben Baby Ace, N3RH, was substantially damaged during a forced landing shortly after takeoff from the Lincoln Regional Airport (LHM), Lincoln, California. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The local flight originated from LHM about 5 minutes prior to the accident.

In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported that he departed runway 15 and flew straight out to about 1,000 feet above ground level (agl) when the engine began to sputter. The pilot stated that he initiated a 180-degree turn toward the airport, however, did not have enough altitude to make the airport and initiated a forced landing to a nearby field. During the off-airport landing, the landing gear collapsed and the airplane subsequently nosed over.

Examination of the airplane by the NTSB IIC revealed that the fuselage and engine firewall was structurally damaged. The airplane was recovered to a secure location for further examination.

Examination of the recovered airplane revealed that the wings were removed to facilitate recovery of the airplane. The Continental C75-12 engine, serial number 179612, remained attached to the airframe. All engine accessories remained attached with the exception of the carburetor, which was displaced from its mounts. The top spark plugs were removed and the crankshaft was rotated by hand using the propeller. Thumb compression was obtained on all four cylinders. Both magnetos produced spark with impulse coupling engagement when the crankshaft was rotated.

The carburetor was intact, however, separated from its mounts. The throttle and mixture levers moved from stop to stop when the levers were actuated. When the throttle lever was actuated, the accelerator pump expelled fuel. The carburetor was disassembled and examined. The internal float bowl contained residual liquid that was consistent with automotive fuel. A small amount of red sand like debris was observed within the float bowl. The carburetor fuel screen was found to be free of debris. The floats and needle valve assembly were unremarkable.

The airframe fuel strainer (gascolator) was found intact with all of the fuel lines secure. The gascolator bowl was removed and some red sand like debris was noted. The screen was removed and a significant amount of red sand like debris was observed partially restricting the screen and fuel outlet port to the engine.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Private

## Age:
64

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Center

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
None

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Sport pilot

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
February 10, 2004

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
June 10, 2013

## Flight Time:
1487 hours (Total, all aircraft), 11 hours (Total, this make and model), 1487 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
CORBEN BABY ACE

## Registration:
N3RH

## Model/Series:
D UNDESIGNAT

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
1972

## Amateur Built:
Yes

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental (Special)

## Serial Number:
REH-1

## Landing Gear Type:
Tailwheel

## Seats:
1

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
September 8, 2014 Condition

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
632 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hrs

## Engines:
1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
484 Hrs as of last inspection

## Engine Manufacturer:
Continental

## ELT:
Not installed

## Engine Model/Series:
C75

## Registered Owner:
KNOBLOCH ELMER W

## Rated Power:
75 Horsepower

## Operator:
KNOBLOCH ELMER W

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

| Conditions at Accident Site: | Visual (VMC) |
| --- | --- |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | KSMF,33 ft msl |
| Observation Time: | 18:53 Local |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Clear |
| Lowest Ceiling: | None |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | / |
| Wind Direction: | / |
| Altimeter Setting: | 29.95 inches Hg |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Lincoln, CA (LHM ) |
| Destination: | Lincoln, CA (LHM ) |
| Departure Time: | 12:10 Local |

| Condition of Light: | Day |
| --- | --- |
| Distance from Accident Site: | 16 Nautical Miles |
| Direction from Accident Site: | 227° |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 29°C / 5°C |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Type of Clearance: | None |
| Type of Airspace: | Class G |

# Airport Information

| Airport: | LINCOLN RGNL/KARL HARDER FIELD LHM |
| --- | --- |
| Airport Elevation: | 121 ft msl |
| Runway Used: |  |
| Runway Length/Width: |  |

| Runway Surface Type: | Dirt |
| --- | --- |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| --- | --- |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |

| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| --- | --- |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 38.880001,-121.340835(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Cawthra, Joshua

## Additional Participating Persons:
Gregory L Michael; Federal Aviation Administration; Sacramento, CA

## Original Publish Date:
February 23, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90219](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90219)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90219).