# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Jacksonville, Oregon

## Accident Number:
WPR15LA032

## Date & Time: 
November 2, 2014, 14:56 Local

## Registration:
N1593M

## Aircraft:
Cessna T210M

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Injuries:
1 Minor

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Analysis

The pilot reported that, during cruise flight, the engine began running roughly with smoke developing inside the cabin, followed by oil covering the windshield. The pilot stated that the engine continued to run and that his attempts to increase the power setting resulted in severe shaking and more smoke. The pilot initiated a forced landing in a nearby field. During the landing roll, the nosewheel landing gear dug into mud, and the airplane subsequently nosed over.

Postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the Nos. 5 and 6 connecting rods were liberated from the crankshaft. The No. 6 connecting rod was thermally discolored and fractured, which was likely caused by oil starvation to the No. 6 connecting rod journal and bearing. The No. 5 connecting rod was also fractured; however, the connecting rod and bearing did not exhibit thermal discoloration or distress; the fracture likely resulted due to damage sustained when the No. 6 connecting rod fractured. The Nos. 1 and 2 connecting rods also exhibited thermal discoloration and distress, which likely resulted from the engine's continued operation after the liberation of the No. 6 connecting rod.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A loss of engine power during cruise flight due to the failure of the No. 6 connecting rod, which resulted from oil starvation.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
Recip engine power section - Failure

## Environmental issues
Wet/muddy terrain - Contributed to outcome

## Aircraft
Oil - Fluid level

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Enroute-cruise | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Landing-landing roll | Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) |
| Landing-landing roll | Nose over/nose down |

On November 2, 2014, about 1456 Pacific standard time, a Cessna T210M, N1593M, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near Jacksonville, Oregon. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The cross-country flight originated from Grants Pass, Oregon, with an intended destination of Long Beach, California.

In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported that during cruise flight at an altitude of about 12,900 feet mean sea level, the engine began to run rough with smoke developing inside the cabin, followed by oil covering the windshield. The pilot stated that he observed the oil pressure gauge indicating 0, however, the engine continued to run, and that any attempt to increase the power setting resulted in severe shaking and smoke. The pilot initiated a forced landing in a nearby field. During the landing roll, the nosewheel landing gear dug into the mud, and the airplane subsequently nosed over.

Examination of the airplane by local law enforcement revealed that the right wing at the flap aileron junction was bent downward about 45 degrees. Oil was observed on the windshield and surrounding the fuselage area. The wreckage was recovered to a secure location for further examination.

The engine was removed from the airframe and sent to the facilities of Continental Motors, Inc., Mobile, Alabama, for further examination. The engine was examined on March 3, 2015, by representatives from Continental Motors under the supervision of the NTSB IIC. The examination revealed a large hole on the top left side of the crankcase over the number 6 cylinder, and a smaller hole on the top right side of the crankcase over the number 5 cylinder. Visual inspection through each hole revealed that the number 5 and number 6 connecting rods were liberated from the connecting rod journals. The engine was subsequently disassembled and inspected.

The crankcase halves remained secured to each other. The main bearing saddles for the number 1 through number 3 bearings did not display any anomalies. The number 4 and number 5 bearing saddles displayed displaced material with the number 5 being the worst. In addition, the oil feed hole for the number 5 bearing was obstructed by displaced saddle material. The oil galleys on the cylinder 2, 4, and 6 side of the crankcase were free of debris, with the exception the hole at the number 5 main bearing.

---

# Transcription of Page 4 of 8 (WPR15LA032)

## The Number 1 and 2 Main Bearings
- Displayed normal wear and a few score marks consistent with hard-particle-passage
- There was no sign of lock tab movement or lock slot elongation

## The Number 3 Main Bearing
- Displayed wear and scoring that removed the babbit layer and displayed the copper underlay
- There was no sign of lock tab movement or lock slot elongation

## The Number 4 Main Bearing
- Was discolored black, heavily worn, and displaced in the saddle such that the bearing split line did not match up with the case half split line
- There was no evidence of lateral lock slot elongation
- The oil feed to the backside of the number 4 bearing was unobstructed

## The Number 5 Main Bearing
- Was discolored black, heavily worn, and displaced in the saddle such that the bearing split line did not match up with the case half split line
- There was no evidence of lateral lock slot elongation
- The oil feed to the backside of the number 5 bearing was obstructed by displaced saddle material

## The Crankshaft
- Remained intact but displayed thermal distress at the number 1, number 2, and the number 6 connecting rod journals
- The number 6 connecting rod journal was also mechanically damaged and the oil feed hole was no longer visible due to the displaced material
- The crankshaft's number 4 and number 5 main bearing journals displayed black thermal discoloration, along with material displacement at the number 5 bearing journal
- All of the crankshaft oil tubes were clear of debris with the exception of the number 6 connecting rod journal, which was mechanically damaged

## The Number 1 Connecting Rod
- Remained secured to the crankshaft and the piston pin
- Displayed thermal discoloration and evidence of heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication
- The oil feed to the number 1 bearing was clear of debris
- The connecting rod bearing displayed evidence of thermal discoloration and heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication

## The Number 2 Connecting Rod
- Remained secured to the crankshaft and the piston pin
- Displayed thermal discoloration and evidence of heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication
- The oil feed to the number 2 bearing was clear of debris
- The bearing displayed evidence of thermal discoloration and heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication

## The Number 3 Connecting Rod
- Remained secured to the crankshaft and piston pin
- There were no signs of operational distress with the connecting rod
- The oil feed to the number 3 bearing was clear of debris
- The connecting rod bearing displayed some wear, but did not show the signs of thermal distress or lack of lubrication as the others

## The Number 4 Connecting Rod
- Remained secured to the crankshaft and piston pin
- There were no signs of operational distress with the connecting rod
- The oil feed to the number 4 bearing was clear of debris
- The connecting rod bearing displayed some wear, but did not show the signs of thermal distress or lack of lubrication as the others

## The Number 5 Connecting Rod
- Was fractured into four pieces, none of which displayed thermal discoloration
- Mechanical damage was evident on all of the components
- The piston end of the connecting rod remained attached to the piston pin
- The oil feed to the number 5 bearing was clear of debris
- The number 5 connecting rod bearing was liberated along with the fractured connecting rod
- The bearing was mechanically damaged but there was little-to-no thermal distress noted on the bearing

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Private

## Age:
57

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land, Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 3 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
April 2, 2014

## Occupational Pilot:
No

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
January 13, 2014

## Flight Time:
4300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1300 hours (Total, this make and model), 4250 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 75 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

The number 6 connecting rod was fractured into five pieces, and all displayed thermal discoloration and mechanical damage. The piston end of the connecting rod remained attached to the piston pin. The oil feed to the number 6 bearing was mechanically damaged at the number 6 connecting rod journal; however, it was unobstructed at the number 4 main journal end. Remnants of the connecting rod bearing were found in the oil sump. The remnants were thermally discolored and distorted.

The internal configuration of two engine crankshaft oil tube assemblies for the number 5 and 6 connecting rods was documented using radiographic images that were collected on May 4 and 5, 2015, in Chicago, Illinois. A total of 360 computed tomography (CT) slice images were examined, processed, and analyzed by the NTSB to evaluate the component. Review of the crankshaft oil tube assembly images determined that there was no indication of low or medium density material buildup on the interior of either the upper or lower oil tube assemblies, a medium density material buildup was noted in areas of the crankshaft outside of the oil tube assemblies, the lower oil tube assembly was deformed on one end, and the other end was completely blocked by high density material with a density similar to the density of the crankshaft material, and the upper oil tube assembly had a discontinuity in the wall area at one end of the tube assembly.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Cessna
Registration: N1593M

Model/Series: T210M M
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 1977
Amateur Built: 

Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 21061949

Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle
Seats:

Date/Type of Last Inspection:
April 11, 2014 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 3803 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection: 111 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

Airframe Total Time: 5308.3 Hrs as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer: CONT MOTOR

ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: TSIO-520 SER

Registered Owner: On file
Rated Power: 0 Horsepower

Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) Held: None

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility, Elevation: KMFR,1329 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 13 Nautical Miles

Observation Time: 00:53 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 42°

Lowest Cloud Condition: Scattered / 5000 ft AGL
Visibility 10 miles

Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility (RVR):

Wind Speed/Gusts: 4 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / 

Wind Direction: 330°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / 

Altimeter Setting: 30.22 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 13°C / 3°C

Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation

Departure Point: Grants Pass, OR
Type of Flight Plan Filed: IFR

Destination: Long Beach, CA
Type of Clearance: IFR

Departure Time: 14:20 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: | - |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 42.223609,-123.064445(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Cawthra, Joshua

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Dee Rice; Federal Aviation Administration; Hillsboro, OR
* Nicole Charnon; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
* Jan Smith; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS

## Original Publish Date:
November 5, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90347](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90347)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available here.