# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Key West, Florida

## Date & Time: 
January 3, 2015, 10:15 Local

## Aircraft:
Cessna P206

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air taxi & commuter - Non-scheduled

## Accident Number:
ERA15LA090

## Registration:
N2534X

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
4 Minor, 2 None

## Analysis

The pilot reported that the airplane was about 300 ft above the ground and on final approach when the engine "quit suddenly with no surging or other warning signs." He selected the auxiliary fuel pump to the high position and switched fuel tanks. The pilot stated that the engine "came back to life momentarily and then quit again." The airplane was unable to reach the runway, and the pilot made a forced landing in a lagoon about 1/4 mile short of the runway, during which the right wing sustained structural damage.

Examination of the fuel system revealed that the right fuel tank was full and that the left fuel tank had 15 gallons of fuel remaining. Evidence of fuel was also noted in the lines from the fuel tanks to the fuel manifold valve. Internal engine continuity was confirmed, and compression and suction were observed on all of the cylinders. The spark plug electrodes were normal in appearance. The engine-driven fuel pump and magnetos were tested, and no evidence of a preexisting malfunction was found. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined during postaccident examinations and testing.

---

# Findings

| | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |
| --- | --- |
| Not determined | (general) - Unknown/Not determined |

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Approach-VFR pattern final | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Off-field or emergency landing |

On January 3, 2015, about 1015 eastern standard time (EST), a Cessna P206, N2534X, was force landed in a lagoon following a total loss of engine power during an approach to Key West International Airport (EYW), Key West, Florida. The airline transport pilot and three passengers received minor injuries and two passengers were not injured. The airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was operated by Exec Air Inc. under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated at Naples, Florida (APF) about 0920.

The pilot reported the following. About 300 feet above the ground, on final approach to runway 9, the engine "quit suddenly with no surging or other warning signs." He selected the auxiliary fuel pump to the high position and switched fuel tanks. The engine "came back to life momentarily and then quit again." Unable to make the runway, the airplane landed short in a lagoon, about one quarter mile from the runway. The airplane came to rest in about 3 feet of salt water. The pilot reported that he departed APF with about 78 gallons of fuel on board.

An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration responded to the accident site and examined the wreckage. The right wing exhibited structural damage from impact forces. The fuel selector was in the "off" position; however, he reported that the selector handle was moved to off from the "right tank" position by recovery personnel. The wing tanks were also de-fueled prior to his arrival. About 15 gallons of fuel were recovered from the left tank and about 40 gallons of fuel were recovered from the right tank. The nose gear was crushed upward, into the underside of the engine. There was no fuel or oil observed on the exterior surfaces of the airplane. A fueling record was recovered that indicated 42.2 gallons of fuel was purchased at APF prior to the flight.

Fuel was observed in the lines between the electric boost pump and the engine-driven fuel pump, in the line from the engine-driven pump to the fuel metering valve, and there was fuel in the line entering the fuel manifold valve and inside the valve. The engine-driven fuel pump appeared normal and the drive shaft was intact. The top six spark plugs were removed and were normal in appearance. The engine was turned by hand; internal continuity was established and compression and suction was confirmed an all six cylinders. The magnetos were tuned by hand; the impulse couplings appeared to operate normally. No spark was observed on the ignition leads when the magnetos were turned. The magnetos and ignition harnesses were retained by the FAA inspector for additional examination and testing.

On April 9, 2015, the magnetos, ignition harnesses, and engine driven fuel pump were examined at the Continental Motors facility at Mobile, Alabama under the direction of the NTSB.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate:
Airline transport; Commercial; Flight instructor

## Age:
47

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Single-engine sea; Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
Helicopter

## Restraint Used:
3-point

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
Airplane multi-engine; Airplane single-engine; Instrument airplane

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 1 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
April 26, 2014

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
April 30, 2014

## Flight Time:
8540 hours (Total, all aircraft), 24 hours (Total, this make and model), 8281 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 171 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

The fuel pump (part # 638154-1; serial # 1752) did not exhibit external damage. The spline on the fuel pump was intact and the unit rotated when actuated by hand. The fuel pump was installed on a test stand and ran at rpms between 700 and 3,200 for several minutes. The unit functioned as designed and the recorded pressure was high.

The left magneto (Slick model # 6210; serial # 90080047) did not exhibit external damage. The left magneto was installed on a test bench and ran at different rpms for several minutes. A blue spark was observed on each lead at varying rpms. The right magneto (Slick model # 6210; serial #91040206) did not exhibit external damage. The right magneto was installed on a test bench and ran at different rpms for several minutes. A blue spark was observed on each lead at varying rpms.

Two passengers reported to an FAA inspector that the airplane was "chartered" by a third passenger for the round trip flight to EYW. A credit card receipt for $1,180.80 was provided to investigators, on the third passenger's credit card and charged by the operator, Exec Air. Exec Air holds an FAA Airline Certificate for On Demand Airplane operations. The certificate only has 1 approved aircraft, a Cessna 182. The Cessna 206 used in the accident flight is not approved on the certificate. The owner of Exec Air reported after the accident that the charge to the passenger's credit card was for anticipated expenses incurred during the personal flight. The FAA is pursuing certificate action against the operator and pilot for conducting an unauthorized charter flight. At the time of this writing, that action was still pending.

---

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make: Cessna
Registration: N2534X

## Model/Series: P206
Aircraft Category: Airplane

Year of Manufacture: 1964
Amateur Built:

Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: P206-0034

Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 6

Date/Type of Last Inspection:
May 15, 2014 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 3296 lbs

Time Since Last Inspection: 28 Hrs
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

Airframe Total Time: 4427 Hrs at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer: CONT MOTOR

ELT: C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: IO 520 SERIES

Registered Owner: TWO AERO SEVEN INC
Rated Power: 285 Horsepower

Operator: Exec Air Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) Held:
On-demand air taxi (135)

Operator Does Business As: Execair
Operator Designator Code: E69A

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

Conditions at Accident Site: Visual (VMC)
Condition of Light: Day

Observation Facility, Elevation: EYW,3 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 1 Nautical Miles

Observation Time: 09:53 Local
Direction from Accident Site: 270°

Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility: 10 miles

Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):

Wind Speed/Gusts: 14 knots /
Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: / None

Wind Direction: 120°
Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: / N/A

Altimeter Setting: 30.21 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 27°C / 22°C

Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation

Departure Point: Naples, FL (APF )
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None

Destination: Key West, FL (EYW )
Type of Clearance: VFR flight following

Departure Time: 09:20 Local
Type of Airspace:

---

# Airport Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Airport: | Key West Intl EYW |
| Airport Elevation: | 3 ft msl |
| Runway Used: | 09 |
| Runway Length/Width: | 4801 ft / 100 ft |
| Runway Surface Type: | Asphalt |
| Runway Surface Condition: | Dry |
| IFR Approach: | None |
| VFR Approach/Landing: | Forced landing;Full stop |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| | |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 Minor |
| Passenger Injuries: | 3 Minor, 2 None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Total Injuries: | 4 Minor, 2 None |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 24.55611,-81.771942(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Hicks, Ralph

## Additional Participating Persons:
* Don Casto; FAA/FSDO 19; Miramar, FL
* John Kent; Continental Motors Inc.; Mobile, AL

## Original Publish Date:
October 19, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90569](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90569)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://here).