# Aviation Investigation Final Report

## Location:
Lonoke county, Arkansas

## Date & Time: 
January 17, 2015, 16:30 Local

## Aircraft:
Mooney M20C

## Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)

## Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General aviation - Personal

## Accident Number:
CEN15LA112

## Registration:
N6474U

## Aircraft Damage:
Substantial

## Injuries:
1 None

## Analysis

The pilot reported that, before departure, he conducted an engine run-up, and everything was in the normal operating range. The pilot then departed, and, shortly after takeoff, the engine lost power. During the forced landing, the airplane impacted trees and then came to rest on its belly. Examination of the airplane revealed that no fuel was visible in the right fuel tank and that about 1/2 inch of fuel was visible in the left fuel tank. The carburetor's float bowl was empty of fuel. The carburetor heat and mixture control cables were broken, and they were not attached to their respective points. The end of the mixture control cable was found wrapped around the attachment's bolt to connect it to the mixture control arm. The mixture control arm was removed from the carburetor; the spring under the control arm appeared intact. The cable's break, located under the bolt head, had both a dull and a shiny section, indicating that it may have been partially fractured for some time. A broken mixture control cable or an inadequate fuel supply can cause a loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.

## Probable Cause and Findings

The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:

The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.

---

# Findings

## Aircraft
* Mixture control - Incorrect service/maintenance
* Fuel distribution - Not specified
* Fuel - Fluid level

## Environmental issues
* Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome

---

# Factual Information

## History of Flight

| | |
|-|-|
| Takeoff | Fuel starvation |
| Initial climb | Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event) |
| Emergency descent | Off-field or emergency landing |

On January 17, 2015, about 1630 central standard time, a Mooney M20C airplane, N6474U, lost engine power shortly after departing a private airstrip in Lonoke County, Arkansas. The airline transport rated pilot was not injured and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.

The pilot reported that he performed an engine a run-up with the engine instruments; everything was in the normal operating range. Just after takeoff, he retracted the gear, and shortly thereafter, the engine lost power. He immediately applied carburetor heat; however, he only got a moment of partial power back. The pilot then selected a nearby highway for the forced landing. The airplane collided with several trees just short of the highway, before coming to rest upright on its belly. The responding Federal Aviation Administration inspector, noted extensive damage to the right wing, and forward section of the fuselage. A inspection of the fuel tank filler ports revealed, fuel was not visible in the right fuel tank and about half-inch of fuel was visible in the left fuel tank.

An examination of the engine was conducted by the NTSB IIC. The engine was rotated by hand; a thumb compression test was done on each cylinder. Engine and valve train continuity was confirmed to the accessory drive section. The magnetos produced a spark at each sparkplug terminal. The electric-driven fuel pump operated, when electrical power was supplied. Both the carburetor heat and mixture control cables were broken and not attached to their respective points. For attachment to the carburetor's mixture control arm, the cable end had been wrapped around the attachment's bolt. The cable's break, which was located under the bolt head, had both a dull and a shiny section. The mixture control arm attached to the carburetor, and would remain at whichever position it was placed. The arm was removed from the carburetor and the spring under the mixture control arm appeared intact. The carburetor float bowl drain plug was removed; no fuel exited the bowl.

At 1658, the automated weather reported station located about 15 miles west of the accident site, recorded a temperature of 57 degrees F and a dew point of 36 degrees F. A review of the carburetor icing probability chart, indicated that the airplane was operating in an area that was associated with a risk of carburetor ice at glide power setting.

---

# Pilot Information

## Certificate: 
Airline transport; Commercial

## Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine land; Multi-engine land

## Seat Occupied:
Left

## Other Aircraft Rating(s):
None

## Restraint Used:
Lap only

## Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane

## Second Pilot Present:
No

## Instructor Rating(s):
None

## Toxicology Performed:
No

## Medical Certification:
Class 1 With waivers/limitations

## Last FAA Medical Exam:
July 29, 2014

## Occupational Pilot:
Yes

## Last Flight Review or Equivalent:

## Flight Time:
6000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 200 hours (Total, this make and model), 3500 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)

# Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information

## Aircraft Make:
Mooney

## Registration:
N6474U

## Model/Series:
M20C

## Aircraft Category:
Airplane

## Year of Manufacture:
1962

## Amateur Built:

## Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal

## Serial Number:
2221

## Landing Gear Type:
Retractable - Tricycle

## Seats:

## Date/Type of Last Inspection:
February 28, 2014 Annual

## Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2575 lbs

## Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating

## Airframe Total Time:
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING

## ELT:
Installed

## Engine Model/Series:
O-360

## Registered Owner:
On file

## Rated Power:
180 Horsepower

## Operator:
On file

## Operating Certificate(s) Held:
None

---

# Meteorological Information and Flight Plan

## Conditions at Accident Site:
| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Visual (VMC) | Condition of Light: Day |
| Observation Facility, Elevation: | KLEF |
| Distance from Accident Site: | 15 Nautical Miles |
| Observation Time: | 16:58 Local |
| Direction from Accident Site: | 270° |
| Lowest Cloud Condition: | Clear |
| Visibility | 10 miles |
| Lowest Ceiling: | None |
| Visibility (RVR): |  |
| Wind Speed/Gusts: | 11 knots / |
| Turbulence Type Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Wind Direction: | 210° |
| Turbulence Severity Forecast/Actual: |  / |
| Altimeter Setting: | 29.95 inches Hg |
| Temperature/Dew Point: | 16°C / 2°C |
| Precipitation and Obscuration: | No Obscuration; No Precipitation |
| Departure Point: | Lonoke county, AR |
| Type of Flight Plan Filed: | None |
| Destination: | Lonoke county, AR |
| Type of Clearance: | None |
| Departure Time: |  |
| Type of Airspace: |  |

# Wreckage and Impact Information

| Condition | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Crew Injuries: | 1 None |
| Passenger Injuries: |  |
| Aircraft Damage: | Substantial |
| Aircraft Fire: | None |
| Ground Injuries: | N/A |
| Aircraft Explosion: | None |
| Total Injuries: | 1 None |
| Latitude, Longitude: | 34.971111,-91.83139(est) |

---

# Administrative Information

## Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Hatch, Craig

## Additional Participating Persons:
Bill Aldrich; FAA FSDO; Little Rock, AR

## Original Publish Date:
August 11, 2015

## Last Revision Date:

## Investigation Class:
Class

## Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.

## Investigation Docket:
[https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90627](https://data.ntsb.gov/Docket?ProjectID=90627)

The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency charged by Congress with investigating every civil aviation accident in the United States and significant events in other modes of transportation—railroad, transit, highway, marine, pipeline, and commercial space. We determine the probable causes of the accidents and events we investigate, and issue safety recommendations aimed at preventing future occurrences. In addition, we conduct transportation safety research studies and offer information and other assistance to family members and survivors for each accident or event we investigate. We also serve as the appellate authority for enforcement actions involving aviation and mariner certificates issued by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and US Coast Guard, and we adjudicate appeals of civil penalty actions taken by the FAA.

The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by NTSB regulation, "accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities of any person" (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability is not relevant to the NTSB's statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section 1154(b)). A factual report that may be admissible under 49 United States Code section 1154(b) is available [here](https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Pages/CEN15LA112-factual.aspx).